President Trump joked that he would "have to leave the country" if he loses the upcoming presidential election against Democratic nominee Joe Biden.

"I will deliver optimism, opportunity and hope, and that's what we're doing, and this is why we have this kind of spirit, and I hate to say it because I don't want to insult Georgia, but it's this way all over our country," Trump told a cheering crowd at a campaign event in Macon, Ga., on Friday, later mocking the social distancing and face coverings at Biden's campaign events.

Trump added: "I shouldn't joke because you know what? Running against the worst candidate in the history of presidential politics puts pressure on me. Could you imagine if I lose? My whole life, what am I going to do? I'm going to say 'I lost to the worst candidate in the history of politics.' I'm not going to feel so good."

"Maybe I'll have to leave the country? I don't know." Trump added.

The anti-Trump GOP group The Lincoln Project quickly jabbed the president over his comment.

Trump told a crowd of supporters at a campaign rally in North Carolina last month that "If I lose to him, I don't know what I'm going to do. I will never speak to you again."

Biden's campaign featured the president's comments in its own video on social media.

Trump also joked in 2016 that if he lost the Republican nomination for president, he would not remain in the public eye.

"I'm not sure you're ever going to see me there. I don't think I'm going to lose, but if I do, I don't think you're ever going to see me again, folks. I think I'll go to Turnberry and play golf or something," he said at the time.Pallister PCs Launch RFP to Privatize Manitoba Parks

October 15, 2020

TREATY 1 TERRITORY, WINNIPEG, MB - Manitoba Liberals are condemning the Pallister PCs' decision, along with Travel Manitoba, to issue a request for proposal on how to privatize and sell off Manitoba's parks.

The RFP was posted to MERX on October 13 by Travel Manitoba, entitled "For the Provision of Evaluating Manitoba's Provincial Parks." The RFP acknowledges that the province's parks infrastructure hasn't seen improvements for 40 or 50 years.

Manitoba Liberal Leader Dougald Lamont and MLA for St. Boniface, said the PCs should be investing in infrastructure renewal for parks for Manitoba 150. Instead, the Pallister Government is going to break them up, sell them off, and encourage private operators to gouge Manitobans to raise revenue.

"Public parks belong to all of us. We all own and pay for them through our taxes, and we should be making sure everyone can access them, not just a privileged few," said Lamont. "This is not about improving parks. It is about a broad conservative strategy of transferring commonly owned, public property into private hands for private profit."

The RFP calls for all 76 parks to be evaluated, and requires the contractor to determine:

What assets should be divested?

Identify partnership and P3 investment opportunities with the private sector, municipalities and First Nations to improve park infrastructure/services or decommission/transition parks to other models (i.e. other groups operate or own parks to service their local community).

The RFP also asks to provide recommendations and next steps for:

A new business model for Manitoba Provincial Parks that increases visitor spending, revenues and cost recovery.

Investment and divestment requirements for existing infrastructure assets.

Lamont said the PCs policies are regressive.

"Some things should not be for sale. Public parks should stay public," said Lamont.

You can see the full RFP here.

-30-

View More News