In the wake of attacks against a First Nation’s fishery in southeastern Nova Scotia, questions are being raised about a lack of RCMP enforcement — which many say might have nipped the conflict in the bud.

On Thursday, Sipekne’katik Chief Mike Sack sent a message to Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, asking him to send more law enforcement to the area to quell the conflict and counter actions he has described as hate crimes.

“This truly is systemic racism,” Sack said. “Does Trudeau care about our people? Does he care about reconciliation? They talk about it, but I don’t see any actions toward it.”

Two days earlier, about 200 men descended at different times on a pair of lobster-storage sites being used by the Sipekne’katik First Nation for the moderate livelihood lobster fishery it has undertaken.

The fishery has been launched in the face of opposition from non-Indigenous fishers and long-unresolved negotiations with the federal government over what constitutes a “moderate livelihood.”

At the first site, in New Edinburgh, police reported seeing a van set afire, and people throwing rocks and causing damage to the building and vehicles. At the second, in nearby Middle West Pubnico, the mob trapped a Sipekne’katik fisher inside, hurling rocks and racial taunts until the man was forced to leave without the lobster he’d caught that day. RCMP reportedly advised the fisherman he would have to leave.

No charges have been laid in the incidents.

The actions follow reports of Indigenous lobster lines being cut, traps being pulled up and, in one case, a fishing boat set ablaze when the Sipekne’katik launched its fishery weeks earlier.

No charges have been laid in those instances, either.

The Sipekne’katik chief said he’s been forestalling calls to bring in Indigenous warriors from across the country to take up enforcement in a situation where he believes both the Department of Fisheries and Oceans and the RCMP have been lacking.

“My belief is that everything could have been a lot safer if the DFO acted in the first place, and some of those commercial fishermen were held accountable and charged for their actions,” he said.

“(They’re) believing that they can do whatever they want, and get away with it and take the law into their own hands. And I’m starting to believe that’s true.”

He said the band is in the process of pursuing lawsuits against those who are interfering with its fishery.

RCMP Sgt. Andrew Joyce, meanwhile, said the immediate priority for the police force in the dispute has been to prevent loss of life.

“As a police force, we come to an incident and we’re severely outnumbered. You have 200 or so individuals who have high emotion to an issue, and are confronting another, smaller group of individuals. Our main goal here is the protection of life,” he said.

“We’re trying to make sure nobody is grievously hurt, or worse. We recognize that during this incident, that that there was criminal behaviour. It was being videoed. We understand all that.”

But Joyce said, under those circumstances each arrest would have taken two officers away from a situation in which they were already outnumbered. He also said that the fact that no charges have been laid as yet does not preclude charges for those incidents being laid in the future.

“There are there are some out there who feel that the police response was inadequate. (That) we didn’t do a good job. That’s their right to say that, and I respect them for saying that,” he said.

“A lot of those emotions come from either interactions or frustration over this specific issue of where it is going. And I can’t say this enough. This issue, I’m no expert on. But I do know it is not a police issue. I think we’ll all agree to that.”

The Sipekne’katik cite a Supreme Court of Canada decision in 1999 that acknowledge their treaty right to fish for a modest livelihood. Non-Indigenous fishermen argue that they are opposed to the band’s decision to start a commercial lobster fishing business that is operating outside the federally regulated lobster season.

Colin Sproul, head of the Bay of Fundy Inshore Fishermen’s Association, said he condemns the violence but added it is the product of years of growing concern about the state of the stocks.

Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading...

“We’re Canadians. We should expect that dialogue is always the way to solve our problems, not through violence,” he said.

He also criticized the Mounties for failing to take action against any of the parties to the dispute. He said he was dumbfounded a few weeks ago when he saw Indigenous fishers trying to board a non-Indigenous boat in St. Mary’s Bay while an RCMP tactical squad observed.

“I can accept that Indigenous people may have seen acts of violence perpetrated against them that the RCMP walked away from, too,” he said.

In Ottawa, Minister of Indigenous Services Marc Miller said he found the images of Tuesday night’s violence alarming.

“We’re talking about a fundamental right to earn a moderate livelihood, that is a right the Mi’kmaq are entitled to exercise,” Miller said. He noted that “moderate livelihood” has never been defined in a way that’s acceptable to all sides and said non-Indigenous fishers need be involved in the discussion.

“The risk, if we don’t get this right, is that people will die. ... Violence begets violence, and that is unacceptable,” he said.

Following a cabinet meeting Thursday, Nova Scotia Premier Stephen McNeil said he was “extremely disappointed” by the federal response to date around the Indigenous lobster fishery. McNeil said Ottawa needs to find a workable solution by sitting down with all sides in the dispute as soon as possible.

“This is only getting more entrenched ... they need to be in the same room so everyone knows what each other is saying,” he said.

McNeil also said the province would provide police with the “resources necessary,” including manpower to ensure public safety in the area. “If more people are required, we obviously would have to pick up that bill,” he said.

Provincial Justice Minister Mark Furey said he was satisfied with the RCMP response, adding that he thought it’s been a “measured approach” under difficult circumstances.

Sack said during the news conference the Mi’kmaq fishery will continue despite the damage done to the holding facilities, the burning of one fisherman’s boat and damage to vehicles in recent weeks.

He said the band is now in the process of purchasing the damaged plant in New Edinburgh, which he said would include a buyer’s licence if the sale is completed. “It’s just a matter of doing the paperwork,” he said.

With files from The Canadian Press.

Read more about: (Bloomberg) -- Justin Trudeau’s Covid-19 support programs gave Canada one of the world’s largest budget deficits, and now the prime minister is ready to test public appetite for more red ink.

His Liberal government will likely roll out aspects of its longer-term agenda in a budget update by Finance Minister Chrystia Freeland next month, according to a person familiar with the plans.

The document will mainly focus on updating projections and explaining how the run-up in deficits will be financed, the person said, speaking on condition they not be identified. But the government is also considering funding for some of the initiatives outlined when parliament resumed last month. Big-ticket priorities in the mix include daycare, pharmacare, the environment, housing and transit.

Trudeau has been hinting he wants to keep the fiscal taps open, and the government’s role in the post-pandemic recovery will be the central political debate through the new year. The main opposition Conservatives are already threatening to drag the Bank of Canada into the melee.

“The prime minister laid out that they’re going to do whatever it takes and I think Canadians would generally agree with that approach,” said Elliot Hughes, a former adviser to Freeland’s predecessor, Bill Morneau. “Right now Canadians are supportive, but it’ll be interesting to see where we’re at in five or six months.”

Public opinion polling reflects the risks ahead for Trudeau -- who lacks a parliamentary majority and requires the support of at least one other party to stay in power.

According to a survey by Nanos Research for Bloomberg News earlier this month, almost 60% of respondents say they are at least “somewhat comfortable” with Trudeau’s pledge to continue “supporting people and businesses through this crisis as long as it lasts, whatever it takes.” About 40% were either uncomfortable or somewhat uncomfortable.

But stronger divisions emerge over the direction of fiscal policy post-Covid. A separate Nanos poll published by the Globe and Mail newspaper this week found just over one third of Canadians back borrowing to invest in “social and economic priorities” beyond pandemic needs. Nearly 60% said the government should show restraint or only borrow for pandemic purposes.

The opposition is also trying to straddle the difference between the two types of spending. In contrast to the U.S. where lawmakers have been unable to agree on new stimulus measures, the Conservatives supported legislation last month to beef up programs for unemployed Canadians. But they voted against Trudeau’s so-called Throne Speech, effectively a rebuke of his expansionist long-term vision.

“We believe that permanent new government programs would be a disaster for the country,” Pierre Poilievre, chief Conservative spokesman on finance issues, said in an interview. “Once the pandemic ends, we will need to gradually phase out the deficit -- not permanently lock it into place.”

Canada’s government has already budgeted just under C$400 billion ($303 billion) in response to the pandemic. Adding provincial shortfalls, the International Monetary Fund projects deficits this year will reach around 20% of gross domestic product, the highest in the Group of 20. The parliamentary spending watchdog, meanwhile, predicts a gap of nearly C$74 billion next year without taking into account any new measures.

In an illustration of how heated the debate is becoming, Poilievre said the independent central bank can expect a higher level of scrutiny if it uses its bond-buying power to help Trudeau’s government finance deficits for non-emergency reasons.

The issue even prompted a shake-up of the Liberal front bench this summer. Morneau was forced out in August when friction between his office and Trudeau’s burst into public view.

Corporate leaders are also raising concern, particularly after Canada was stripped of its AAA status by Fitch Ratings Inc. in June.

“We’ve frankly overstimulated the economy for what was necessary,” Goldy Hyder, president of the Business Council of Canada, said by phone. “Take notice of the fact that credit rating agencies are watching.”

©2020 Bloomberg L.P.(Bloomberg) -- Justin Trudeau’s Covid-19 support programs gave Canada one of the world’s largest budget deficits, and now the prime minister is ready to test public appetite for more red ink.

His Liberal government will likely roll out aspects of its longer-term agenda in a budget update by Finance Minister Chrystia Freeland next month, according to a person familiar with the plans.

The document will mainly focus on updating projections and explaining how the run-up in deficits will be financed, the person said, speaking on condition they not be identified. But the government is also considering funding for some of the initiatives outlined when parliament resumed last month. Big-ticket priorities in the mix include daycare, pharmacare, the environment, housing and transit.

Trudeau has been hinting he wants to keep the fiscal taps open, and the government’s role in the post-pandemic recovery will be the central political debate through the new year. The main opposition Conservatives are already threatening to drag the Bank of Canada into the melee.

“The prime minister laid out that they’re going to do whatever it takes and I think Canadians would generally agree with that approach,” said Elliot Hughes, a former adviser to Freeland’s predecessor, Bill Morneau. “Right now Canadians are supportive, but it’ll be interesting to see where we’re at in five or six months.”

Public opinion polling reflects the risks ahead for Trudeau -- who lacks a parliamentary majority and requires the support of at least one other party to stay in power.

According to a survey by Nanos Research for Bloomberg News earlier this month, almost 60% of respondents say they are at least “somewhat comfortable” with Trudeau’s pledge to continue “supporting people and businesses through this crisis as long as it lasts, whatever it takes.” About 40% were either uncomfortable or somewhat uncomfortable.

But stronger divisions emerge over the direction of fiscal policy post-Covid. A separate Nanos poll published by the Globe and Mail newspaper this week found just over one third of Canadians back borrowing to invest in “social and economic priorities” beyond pandemic needs. Nearly 60% said the government should show restraint or only borrow for pandemic purposes.

The opposition is also trying to straddle the difference between the two types of spending. In contrast to the U.S. where lawmakers have been unable to agree on new stimulus measures, the Conservatives supported legislation last month to beef up programs for unemployed Canadians. But they voted against Trudeau’s so-called Throne Speech, effectively a rebuke of his expansionist long-term vision.

“We believe that permanent new government programs would be a disaster for the country,” Pierre Poilievre, chief Conservative spokesman on finance issues, said in an interview. “Once the pandemic ends, we will need to gradually phase out the deficit -- not permanently lock it into place.”

Canada’s government has already budgeted just under C$400 billion ($303 billion) in response to the pandemic. Adding provincial shortfalls, the International Monetary Fund projects deficits this year will reach around 20% of gross domestic product, the highest in the Group of 20. The parliamentary spending watchdog, meanwhile, predicts a gap of nearly C$74 billion next year without taking into account any new measures.

In an illustration of how heated the debate is becoming, Poilievre said the independent central bank can expect a higher level of scrutiny if it uses its bond-buying power to help Trudeau’s government finance deficits for non-emergency reasons.

The issue even prompted a shake-up of the Liberal front bench this summer. Morneau was forced out in August when friction between his office and Trudeau’s burst into public view.

Corporate leaders are also raising concern, particularly after Canada was stripped of its AAA status by Fitch Ratings Inc. in June.

“We’ve frankly overstimulated the economy for what was necessary,” Goldy Hyder, president of the Business Council of Canada, said by phone. “Take notice of the fact that credit rating agencies are watching.”

©2020 Bloomberg L.P."This is pure partisan politics," Liberal House leader Pablo Rodriguez said on Friday, referring to a Conservative motion that would have the House of Commons establish an "anti-corruption committee."

It shouldn't surprise Rodriguez — an MP with more than a decade of experience in Ottawa — to find partisan politics going on around him. As gambling is to a casino, partisanship is to Parliament — it's the reason people are there.

And as Prime Minister Justin Trudeau recently observed (speaking of his inclination to continue with byelections in Toronto), Canadians need to know that their democratic institutions are durable and flexible enough to continue functioning even through a public health emergency.

Leader of the Government in the House of Commons Pablo Rodriguez has accused opposition parties of engaging in "pure partisan politics" — as if there were any other kind in the House of Commons. (Justin Tang/The Canadian Press)

So the operative question isn't who is doing politics here. It's who will end up doing the politics better — or at least less badly. And in this case, the politics comes with the tantalizing possibility of a snap election.

Right now, Liberal MPs are filibustering two House committees over disputes about how to proceed with inquiries into the government's affairs. As a result, the Conservatives now might ask the House on Tuesday to establish the aforementioned "anti-corruption committee."

This committee would pursue several questions the Conservatives have about the government's handling of pandemic-related programs, including the WE Charity affair and allegations that the husband of Trudeau's chief of staff lobbied the government about one program. It also would demand disclosure of any internal government correspondence about the government's decision to prorogue Parliament.

One of the other demands for documents in the Conservative motion — covering 12 years of records from the private agency that handled public speaking appearances by Trudeau, his wife, mother and brother — mirrors an order that was passed by a House committee this summer.

But that previous order expired when Trudeau had Parliament prorogued. There's also an active dispute over whether government officials went too far in redacting information from some documents that have been turned over already.

If the Liberals had a majority in the House, the new Conservative motion would be doomed. They don't, of course — and if the Conservatives are joined by the Bloc Quebecois and NDP in voting in favour, the motion will pass and the creatively named committee will be established.

Prorogation payback

Previous hearings on the ill-fated Canada Student Service Grant did not find any actual corruption before things came to a sudden halt with prorogation in August. The Liberals could claim now that the opposition parties are merely trying to embark on a grand fishing expedition. Even if no outright corruption is ever uncovered, the anti-corruption committee could sustain questions and news stories about the possibility of corruption for weeks.

Conservatives could reasonably reply to the Liberals' claim by pointing out that turnabout is fair play. There was no particular need for Trudeau to prorogue Parliament for a month. He could have allowed House committees to continue meeting while his government prepared a throne speech.

If the prime minister was within his rights to clear the public agenda ahead of that reset, the opposition is within its rights to be even louder in jamming things up again now.

The Liberals are countering the Conservative motion with their own proposal to establish a special committee that would look at all pandemic-related spending by the government — which is similar to an idea already floated by the NDP.

Such a committee could end up looking into some of the same things the Conservatives want to examine (though it's not clear how the Liberals would deal with outstanding demands for document disclosure) but it would take a broader view. Presumably, it also wouldn't be called the "anti-corruption committee."

A confidence game

Rodriguez notably declined to answer directly when he was asked Friday whether the Liberals would treat the Conservative motion as a matter of confidence — that is, whether the prime minister would ask the governor general to call an election if the motion passes.

That leaves open the possibility the government will try to use the possibility of an election as leverage in negotiations between now and Tuesday. (The government also could rearrange the House schedule to push the Conservative motion to a later date.)

"We are entirely focused on the second wave of COVID-19," Trudeau said last Monday when he was asked about the disputes at the House ethics and finance committees. "The Conservatives continue to want to focus on WE Charity. So be it."

It should be possible for politicians to focus on more than one thing at a time, of course. But the Liberals might also believe history shows that voters are willing to look past controversies, purported scandals and parliamentary battles if it seems like the government is properly focused on the major economic and social concerns of the day.

Stephen Harper paid a political price for proroguing Parliament in 2008. (Sean Kilpatrick/The Canadian Press)

For five years, the Liberals (and NDP) used the advantages afforded by minority parliaments to pursue their concerns about Stephen Harper's government. But it wasn't until 2015 — after the Liberals had found a popular leader and assembled a deep and ambitious platform — that voters were ready to change governments.

On the other hand, Harper's approach to Parliament and governing probably contributed ultimately to the Conservatives ending up back in opposition. The Liberal decision to prorogue Parliament in August was not unlike the Harper approach.

Erin O'Toole's Conservatives eventually will have to explain what they would do if they were in government. Depending on how things go on Tuesday, they might have to provide a full explanation very soon.

But unless someone really wants an election this fall, there probably won't be one.

Instead, there could be some kind of parliamentary inquiry into the government's economic and fiscal response to the pandemic. And if the Liberals agree to that, it will be because the opposition compelled them. That, at least, is the sort of thing that a minority parliament is supposed to accomplish.

Listen: CBC Radio's The House on Parliament and the WE Charity scandal