Prime Minister Justin Trudeau today defended the federal government's response to an escalating standoff over a Mi'kmaw fishery in Nova Scotia, saying Ottawa has been "extremely active" in trying to resolve the situation.

Speaking to reporters, he called for an end to the violence and harassment that has been on the rise over the past week in several fishing communities in the southwestern part of the province.

"We are expecting the RCMP and police services to do their jobs and keep people safe," Trudeau said.

"I think there's been some concern that that hasn't been done well enough and that's certainly something we will be looking at very closely."

On Thursday, Mike Sack, the chief of the Sipekne'katik First Nation, urged Trudeau to step in and make sure those involved in the violence are prosecuted.

On Tuesday night, two facilities storing lobster caught by Mi'kmaw fishermen were raided and vandalized by a mob of hundreds of non-Indigenous commercial fishermen. The raids in the fishing communities of New Edinburgh and Middle West Pubnico are part of a series of incidents connected to the fight over a "moderate livelihood" lobster fishery that was launched by the Sipekne'katik First Nation in September.

On Friday, Sack also warned Sipekne'katik fishers about commercial fishermen "taking matters into their own hands" and urged members of the community to get off the water.

He told reporters that several traps belonging to Mi'kmaw fishermen have been cut and roughly three boats belonging to band members were out on the water in St. Marys Bay.

"We're trying everything we can to make sure that they're safe, but I can't blame them for wanting to go out and protect what is theirs," Sack said.

Chief Mike Sack said Friday that commercial fishing boats were on their way to haul Mi'kmaw fishermen's gear on Friday morning. (CBC)

Stuart Knockwood, an official with Sipekne'katik First Nation, said some Mi'kmaw fishermen went out on the water Friday to retrieve their gear, fearing it would be tampered with.

Knockwood went on out on the water himself to look for evidence of interference with the Mi'kmaw fishing operation. He said he came back with a buoy that had been sliced open and some small pieces of fishing line that had been cut.

"The rest of the line is at the bottom of the water," he said.

Knockwood said he also took photos of two fishing vessels in the area, although he doesn't know for sure if they were the culprits. He said the band will pass along the information to the federal Department of Fisheries and Oceans and the RCMP in the hopes that they'll investigate and lay any appropriate charges.

Sack said while he had a promising conversation with federal Fisheries Minister Bernadette Jordan on Thursday, the lack of action by DFO to protect Mi'kmaw fishermen could undermine any progress made.

"Unfortunately, if DFO doesn't act and remove commercial fishermen from the water from interfering with our rights, the conversation will end," he said. "We're not going to continue to talk to move forward if they're not willing to protect us and to uphold our treaty right."

Lobster for sale

In Halifax, Sipekne'katik band member Cheryl Maloney sold about 50 kilograms of Mi'kmaw-harvested lobster on the sidewalk Friday outside Province House — a location she chose because she said it was time for the provincial government to step in to help resolve the dispute.

Since the launch of Sipekne'katik's moderate livelihood fishery, Premier Stephen McNeil has said the issue falls exclusively under federal jurisdiction. Maloney, however, argues the province needs to amend a provincial regulation that says it's only legal to buy fish caught by someone with a federal commercial licence.

Maloney sold out in about an hour, with one woman paying $60 for a single lobster as a show of support.

Sack, however, said he did not sanction the sale, fearing it might hamper or reverse the fishery's progress.

'This community is out of hand'

The vice-president of a fishermen's union in Nova Scotia stepped down Friday, citing fears for his family's safety as threats from some non-Indigenous fishermen opposed to a self-regulated Mi'kmaw lobster fishery continue to escalate.

Joel Comeau, a former member of the Local 9 of the Maritime Fishermen's Union, was supposed to meet with Sack on Friday morning but abruptly cancelled the meeting.

Joel Comeau said Friday that he's stepping down from his position with Local 9 of the Maritime Fishermen's Union after four years. (Olivier Lefebvre)

Comeau said he's received "a lot of flak from my people and a lot of intimidation" over his willingness to work with Sack to find a way forward.

"I've been followed right to my house with my family in the truck at seven o'clock in the morning and people with tinted windows sitting across my driveway, you know, intimidating me and some language that I probably can't use on the air," Comeau told CBC's Maritime Noon Friday.

He said one of his friends and his friend's young daughter had to be escorted out of a restaurant by police on Thursday.

"This community is out of hand. This community feels unsafe," said Comeau.

This screenshot from a video posted to Facebook shows a man grabbing and shoving Chief Mike Sack during an altercation this week. (Facebook)

Commercial fishermen are angry the fishery is operating outside the federally mandated commercial season, while the Mi'kmaq say they're simply exercising their treaty rights and that their small-scale fishery would not have a negative effect on lobster stocks.

Even after the events of this week, Comeau and Sack shared a message of calm and committed to sitting down together to talk.

Their exchange about the need for commercial and Mi'kmaw fishermen to work together was caught on video Wednesday.

Sack said he has a lot of respect for Comeau and was disappointed to hear that he'd resigned.

"For them to turn on their own people like that, it should be a clear indication for Canada what we're going through, and we're outsiders so it's 10 times worse for us," Sack said.

Mainstreet NS 0:00 Sipekne'katik chief and commercial fisherman call for peaceful and constructive dialogue Joel Comeau, a third generation lobster fisherman from Meteghan, and Mike Sack, chief of Sipekne'katik First Nation, join host Jeff Douglas to talk about the way forward after this week's vandalism and violence in southwest Nova Scotia. 0:00

Comeau said he presented a woven basket with tobacco to an elder at the Saulnierville Wharf on Treaty Day and was looking forward to continuing his conversation with Sack.

"It is a shame that it's not going to happen, and the fishermen felt that I was betraying them and that I was going behind their backs," he said.

He said he places the blame for what's happening in southwest Nova Scotia squarely on Jordan's shoulders and the inaction of DFO officials.

Jordan said Thursday she is in negotiations with the Sipekne'katik First Nation and talking to commercial fishermen.

Comeau said that while commercial fishermen will have to find someone else to fight on their behalf, he also understands their anger and knows where it's coming from.

"There's no divide. The fishermen are united. The coalition is united," he said. "The divide is with me and my family and my family is number one, so you're not able to twist this to be blaming anybody. Every organization is working 120 per cent on this file. Everybody wants answers."

MORE TOP STORIES PEMBROKE -- Rick Powers says he will never be shopping at Staples again.

The 75-year-old went to the office supplies store in Pembroke, Ont. the evening of Oct. 8 to buy a printer. After entering the store, Powers says he was confronted by an employee for not wearing a mask.

"The guy came over, one of the store people and said you have to wear a mask. I said I don’t wear a mask. He said you’ve got to leave," recounts Powers. "I was going to go out and I said, whoa just wait a minute, and I showed him my doctor’s letter. The employee called the manager over. He looked at the letter and said 'I don’t care; we wear masks in here or leave.' And I left."

Powers lives by himself in Pembroke and says his closest family is in Ottawa. Powers says he went to the store that day to buy a printer. He needs it to print off his COVID-19 test results in order to visit his wife, who is living with dementia in long-term care.

Powers’ note from his doctor reads as follows, "To whom this may concern, the above person is unable to wear a face covering due to medical reasons." Powers says he received the note from his doctor after developing breathing problems after multiple surgeries.

Infectious disease specialist Dr. Abdu Sharkawy believes notes like these should not be handed out as liberally.

"The percentage of people who actually have a legitimately serious condition, that prevents them from being able to wear a face covering for even short periods of time is very, very small," said Dr. Sharkawy.

Dr. Sharkawy says in the event one is not able to wear a face mask due to one reason or another, they should at least be wearing a face shield.

"It’s my firm belief that a lot of people are abusing this loophole, perhaps putting pressure on family physicians or others to provide them with exemptions."

According to one employment lawyer, Staples needed to find a work around for Powers.

"That kind of accommodation, even in the context of COVID, is necessary," says Alex Lucifero, managing partner at Samfiru Tumarkin LLP. "Otherwise Staples in this case are discriminating against that client or customer on the basis of their disability."

"To me that’s disrespecting doctors and it’s disrespecting anyone that has a medical condition," says Powers.

Sharkawy recommends that anyone unable to wear a face mask use a face shield instead, noting face shields do not cause distress to anybody with breathing issues. If that option is not a possibility, Sharkawy maybe the trip isn’t worth it.

"If you are in a situation where there is absolutely no assistance you can get from family members or friends, or anyone else in your community - and I would argue those situations are probably few and far between - perhaps you shouldn’t be going out and taking liberties."PEMBROKE -- Rick Powers says he will never be shopping at Staples again.

The 75-year-old went to the office supplies store in Pembroke, Ont. the evening of Oct. 8 to buy a printer. After entering the store, Powers says he was confronted by an employee for not wearing a mask.

"The guy came over, one of the store people and said you have to wear a mask. I said I don’t wear a mask. He said you’ve got to leave," recounts Powers. "I was going to go out and I said, whoa just wait a minute, and I showed him my doctor’s letter. The employee called the manager over. He looked at the letter and said 'I don’t care; we wear masks in here or leave.' And I left."

Powers lives by himself in Pembroke and says his closest family is in Ottawa. Powers says he went to the store that day to buy a printer. He needs it to print off his COVID-19 test results in order to visit his wife, who is living with dementia in long-term care.

Powers’ note from his doctor reads as follows, "To whom this may concern, the above person is unable to wear a face covering due to medical reasons." Powers says he received the note from his doctor after developing breathing problems after multiple surgeries.

Infectious disease specialist Dr. Abdu Sharkawy believes notes like these should not be handed out as liberally.

"The percentage of people who actually have a legitimately serious condition, that prevents them from being able to wear a face covering for even short periods of time is very, very small," said Dr. Sharkawy.

Dr. Sharkawy says in the event one is not able to wear a face mask due to one reason or another, they should at least be wearing a face shield.

"It’s my firm belief that a lot of people are abusing this loophole, perhaps putting pressure on family physicians or others to provide them with exemptions."

According to one employment lawyer, Staples needed to find a work around for Powers.

"That kind of accommodation, even in the context of COVID, is necessary," says Alex Lucifero, managing partner at Samfiru Tumarkin LLP. "Otherwise Staples in this case are discriminating against that client or customer on the basis of their disability."

"To me that’s disrespecting doctors and it’s disrespecting anyone that has a medical condition," says Powers.

Sharkawy recommends that anyone unable to wear a face mask use a face shield instead, noting face shields do not cause distress to anybody with breathing issues. If that option is not a possibility, Sharkawy maybe the trip isn’t worth it.

"If you are in a situation where there is absolutely no assistance you can get from family members or friends, or anyone else in your community - and I would argue those situations are probably few and far between - perhaps you shouldn’t be going out and taking liberties."Send this page to someone via email

A new report says COVID-19 has widened the gap between the haves and have-nots in Canada, amplifying the economic disparities that existed pre-pandemic.

The affordability index by BDO Canada Ltd. found that while one in five Canadians say they are better off, nearly two in five say their personal finances deteriorated during the first wave.

The index, based on polling data by the Angus Reid Group, found that those who are worse off are nearly four times more likely to say their debt load is overwhelming.

The report underscores a yawning chasm between Canadians who are losing ground and those whose financial situation has improved during the pandemic or hasn’t changed.

Story continues below advertisement

Doug Jones, president of BDO Debt Solutions, says the affordability index shows Canadians are struggling more and more with the cost of living.

He says COVID-19 has prompted Canadians to cut back on spending and save more, but that people are also finding it more difficult to keep up with debt.

1:47 Coronavirus: Trudeau says government will keep investing to ‘shoulder debt’ over Canadians Coronavirus: Trudeau says government will keep investing to ‘shoulder debt’ over Canadians

“These factors will likely put long-term stress on families and the economy,” Jones says in a statement. “Now is the time to keep a close eye on household budgets and avoid debt whenever possible.”

The survey found that two-thirds of Canadians with debt cannot keep up with their debt payments or have had to make sacrifices in their budgeting.

While this typically involves foregoing non-essential “nice-to-have” purchases like entertainment or recreation, the survey found that nearly a quarter of Canadians forego essentials like food or clothing.

Story continues below advertisement

The survey also showed that residents of British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario were more likely to accrue debt during the pandemic.

READ MORE: One-third of working moms mulled quitting their jobs due to COVID-19, survey shows

Meanwhile, Canadians who are saving more tend to be young, university educated and earn more than $100,000, the survey found.

This cohort tended to shift spending away from non-essentials such as restaurants and travel into savings — reducing concerns about debt.

The Angus Reid poll, in partnership with BDO Canada, included 2,047 Canadian adults surveyed between Sept. 1 and Sept. 8. According to the polling industry’s generally accepted standards, online surveys cannot be assigned a margin of error because they do not randomly sample the population.