Liberals propose special committee to examine pandemic-related spending

OTTAWA — The minority Liberal government is proposing a special House of Commons committee to examine billions of dollars of COVID-19 pandemic-related spending.

The proposal is an attempt to pre-empt a Conservative party motion to create a special "anti-corruption" committee that would zero in exclusively on what the official Opposition considers scandals — including the decision to have WE Charity manage a student services grant program, despite Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's close family ties to the organization.

The Conservative motion is slated for debate and a vote next week and government House leader Pablo Rodriguez is not ruling out making it a test of confidence in the minority government.

He says the Conservative motion is "pure partisan politics" aimed at "totally jamming the government" when it should be focused on helping Canadians weather the second wave of the deadly coronavirus that causes COVID-19.

By contrast, Rodriguez says he is proposing "a serious committee" that will do "serious work" and which could help the government improve emergency programs to help cope with the pandemic.

Rodriguez says he's been discussing the proposal with the Bloc Quebecois and the NDP, both of which have also floated the idea of creating a special committee to take over the WE investigation and look into other alleged misuses of public funds.

This report by The Canadian Press was first published Oct. 16, 2020.

The Canadian Press FILE PHOTO: Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan attends a joint news conference with Russian President Vladimir Putin (not pictured) following talks in Moscow, Russia March 5, 2020. Pavel Golovkin/Pool via REUTERS/File Photo

ISTANBUL (Reuters) - Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan told Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau that Canada’s suspension of the export of some drone technology was not in line with the spirit of alliance, Erdogan’s office said late on Friday.

Canada suspended the export of some drone technology to Turkey earlier this month as it probes allegations the equipment was used by Azeri forces involved in fighting with Armenia.

In a phone call on Friday, Erdogan and Trudeau discussed improving relations and increasing bilateral trade, the Turkish presidency said, adding that they also talked about overcoming issues regarding cooperation in the defence sector.

“During the call, President Tayyip Erdogan said Canada’s suspension of the export of some military goods to Turkey due to the Azerbajian-Armenia conflict... is against the spirit of alliance,” the presidency said.

Turkey and Canada are both members of NATO.

Following Canada’s announcement, Turkey’s Foreign Ministry had said the suspension showed a double standard.

Turkey’s military exports to its ally Azerbaijan have risen six-fold this year, with sales of drones and other military equipment rising to $77 million last month alone before fighting broke out over the Nagorno-Karabakh region, according to exports data.

Canadian arms control group Project Ploughshares says video of air strikes released by Azerbaijan indicates the drones had been equipped with imaging and targeting systems made by L3Harris Wescam, the Canada-based unit of L3Harris Technologies Inc LHX.N.

Ankara has said it stands firmly beside its close ally in the conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh.FILE PHOTO: Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan attends a joint news conference with Russian President Vladimir Putin (not pictured) following talks in Moscow, Russia March 5, 2020. Pavel Golovkin/Pool via REUTERS/File Photo

ISTANBUL (Reuters) - Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan told Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau that Canada’s suspension of the export of some drone technology was not in line with the spirit of alliance, Erdogan’s office said late on Friday.

Canada suspended the export of some drone technology to Turkey earlier this month as it probes allegations the equipment was used by Azeri forces involved in fighting with Armenia.

In a phone call on Friday, Erdogan and Trudeau discussed improving relations and increasing bilateral trade, the Turkish presidency said, adding that they also talked about overcoming issues regarding cooperation in the defence sector.

“During the call, President Tayyip Erdogan said Canada’s suspension of the export of some military goods to Turkey due to the Azerbajian-Armenia conflict... is against the spirit of alliance,” the presidency said.

Turkey and Canada are both members of NATO.

Following Canada’s announcement, Turkey’s Foreign Ministry had said the suspension showed a double standard.

Turkey’s military exports to its ally Azerbaijan have risen six-fold this year, with sales of drones and other military equipment rising to $77 million last month alone before fighting broke out over the Nagorno-Karabakh region, according to exports data.

Canadian arms control group Project Ploughshares says video of air strikes released by Azerbaijan indicates the drones had been equipped with imaging and targeting systems made by L3Harris Wescam, the Canada-based unit of L3Harris Technologies Inc LHX.N.

Ankara has said it stands firmly beside its close ally in the conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh.Send this page to someone via email

Montreal doctors say the Quebec government is still ignoring their concerns about the shortage of family physicians in the city.

The comment follows the health ministry’s revelation that it’ll issue 98 family doctor permits for 2021, about the same as this year. Family physicians like Jhanzaib Sherwani believe it means certain populations will continue to be underserved. He said he’s been trying to get a permit to practice as a family doctor in Parc-Extension for two years.

“Traditionally this has been an area which has lacked access to primary care,” he told Global News from a clinic he opened in the area.

Sherwani has a permit, known by the French acronym, PREM (plans régionaux d’effectifs médicaux) to practice in Ahuntsic-Montreal North jurisdiction.

PREMs are issued annually by region, meaning he cannot practice in Parc-Ex, which comes under the Côte-des-Neiges-Metro-Parc-Extension region. Under the rules, he has to spend most of his time in the area which his permit covers — 55 per cent of his time, minimum. It means his Parc-Ex clinic is open for just two days a week.

Story continues below advertisement

2:13 Advocates say socio-cultural barriers in Quebec’s health-care system an example of systemic racism Advocates say socio-cultural barriers in Quebec’s health-care system an example of systemic racism

Read more: Treatment of Indigenous woman in Quebec hospital puts focus on systemic racism

His wife Meera Kotecha, who recently completed her studies in medicine, also wants a permit to work in Parc-Ex, where the need is great.

“I have goals to work with marginalized populations and work with women, in particular, to advocate for them,” she explained.

According to Sherwani, one reason the Parc-Extension neighbourhood is underserved is that it falls in the same region as Côte-des-Neiges and a part of downtown Montreal where there are large hospitals and teaching institutions.

“Traditionally people who get the PREMs in this area tend to work at those institutions,” he pointed out.

Story continues below advertisement

That leaves communities like Parc-Ex without enough family doctors, he argued, made worse because the area is densely populated, with many people considered lower-income.

“The number of PREMs that are allocated doesn’t represent the needs of the population of this area,” he noted.

Other general practitioners like Henry Coopersmith say they’ve been pressing the government to change the process of issuing of PREMs for years.

“Because it’s a management solution,” he insisted from his office in Westmount. “It’s not just money.”

Coopersmith says the current system leaves too many gaps, especially in Montreal because of its population, leaving people to have to wait years to get a family doctor.

“Which makes no sense,” he fumed. “It absolutely makes no sense.”

He warns that the problem will likely get worse because a large number of doctors are about to retire, including himself, in a few years.

“I will have to be replaced by two and a half physicians, but the PREM will only give one physician place to take over my 3,800 patients,” he said, pointing out that most doctors take about 1,000 patients.

Story continues below advertisement

“So I’m going to have 2,800 patients who are not going to have a physician,” he said.

Read more: Internationally trained doctors in Quebec want to help in coronavirus crisis

Quebec Health Minister Christian Dubé said Wednesday that his government is trying to find ways to make it easier for Quebecers to find a doctor.

“We’re working on the quantum, having more generalists,” he said. “But we’re also working on making sure that Quebecers can call a doctor and have an answer within 36 hours, even though they are not allocated to one.”

Sherwani said because Parc-Extension has to compete with big hospitals for physicians, he has been pushing to have the area become its own jurisdiction. For 2021, 10 permits have been allocated to the region, but three of the positions have already been reserved. He and Kotecha say they hope they each get one of the balance to be able to work in their Parc-Ex clinic.