HALIFAX -- Justin Trudeau called Friday for federal agencies to ensure those involved in an Indigenous-led lobster fishery are safe, a day after a Mi'kmaq chief accused him of offering words rather than action.

The prime minister's comments came in the wake of two violent clashes involving 200 people on Tuesday outside lobster pounds that handle Indigenous-caught lobster in southwestern Nova Scotia.

Chief Mike Sack of the Sipekne'katik First Nation held a news conference Thursday to condemn Ottawa's handling of the situation.

He referred to the RCMP as "useless," saying the force sent too few officers to the tense scenes in the two communities.

As for Trudeau, Sack said he had to go beyond sending comforting tweets and begin to send reinforcements for the law enforcement agencies on land and water.

Trudeau told reporters in Ottawa his government has called for an end to the violence and harassment and agreed his government must ensure adequate policing.

"We need to make sure that our police, our security officials are there to make sure everyone is protected," he said.

"We will certainly continue to work toward reconciliation with Indigenous peoples, recognizing the rights they have, established for quite some time, regarding the fisheries, and we must find a way forward that will work for everyone."

The Sipekne'katik band argues Indigenous people in Atlantic Canada and Quebec have a treaty right to fish for a moderate livelihood where and when they want, based on a 1999 Supreme Court of Canada decision that cites treaties signed by the Crown in the 1700s.

Many non-Indigenous critics, however, invoke a clarification issued four months after the 1999 ruling, stating the Mi'kmaq treaty rights would be subject to federal regulations to ensure conservation of the resource, in consultation with First Nations.

Darryl Davies, a criminologist based at Carleton University in Ottawa, said in an interview Friday that the tense confrontations are showing the RCMP don't have enough officers in place in rural detachments.

He said officers have little option but to stand by, rather than start making arrests, when there aren't enough "boots on the ground" to quell a potential riot.

Davies -- who has studied RCMP policing and training -- says this week's events illustrated a lack of planning for a situation that has shown potential to erupt for over a month, since the Indigenous fishery was launched in mid-September.

"You need resources . . . . You need to be able to show some force that will deter these people," he said.

"If you're in a mob and you arrive and see 10 officers, you'll say, 'Who's going to stop us?' "

A spokesman for the RCMP, Sgt. Andrew Joyce, said the police presence is growing now. "Our presence has increased each day since the events of Oct. 13 (Tuesday)," he wrote in an email.

Meanwhile, some Indigenous activists showed little sign of backing down in the push to create a market for the Indigenous fishery.

A group set up in front of the legislature in Halifax Friday to sell lobster, and over 100 people lined up to purchase the catch from Cheryl Maloney, a member of the Sipekne'katik band.

The sale and purchase of lobster without a federal commercial licence is considered illegal under a provincial regulation.

"The premier had to see the support for doing what's right and the support for amending their legislation to make it consistent with our rights," Maloney said.

Joel Comeau, a fisherman based in Meteghan, N.S., said in an interview that the conflict is taking an emotional toll on all concerned.

He said he is worried about his small, predominantly francophone community, because it is depressed and "emotionally shattered" by the ongoing tensions with the Indigenous fishing in St. Marys Bay.

He said Friday he is stepping down from his local position with the Maritime Fishermen's Union because he and his family have become fatigued from trying to advocate for a solution.

The 45-year-old fisher said the federal Fisheries Department has failed to include all parties in talks, and frustrations have boiled over.

"Everybody is hurting inside. My wife pulled me inside and said, 'We can't continue this fight,' " he said.

This report by The Canadian Press was first published Oct. 16, 2020. Article content continued

This is simply opacity for its own sake

Veteran Canadian journalist Michael Petrou told an amazing tale on Twitter on Thursday with respect to his investigation into aid Canada provided to Libyan rebels way back in 2011. At the time, he appealed one of the redactions in documents he had received through an access-to-information request. This week, seven years later, his appeal was upheld … and the foreign affairs department refused to nix the redaction anyway.

The information in question wouldn’t have caused Harper’s government any grief in 2011, let alone Trudeau’s in 2020. This is simply opacity for its own sake.

It doesn’t have to be this way. Non-journalist Canadians are often incredulous when you tell them how much more forthcoming American officialdom is with harmless information, but it’s night and day. Communications officers in the U.S. government generally exist to communicate with the public, not to intermediate between grown-adult journalists and grown-adult civil servants and politicians who are perfectly capable of calling each other’s telephones. We could do that too, if we wanted. But governments don’t want it, and nobody cares, so it doesn’t happen.

Electoral reform remains Trudeau’s signature broken promise, if only because he broke it so flamboyantly, so insultingly, and at such great expense. But at least he felt the need to humour the proportional representation fans who fell for his grift, setting up a committee and pretending to be interested in its findings. His promise to fix access-to-information procedures and timelines, his “open by default” pledge, didn’t even get that. It got chucked behind a sofa and forgotten.

Flying this blind, Canadians are relying enormously on their politicians’ honour, good intentions and backbone to stay on the straight and narrow. They should tune into the ethics or finance committee some day soon and ask themselves if that’s wise.

• Email: cselley@nationalpost.com | Twitter: cselleyArticle content continued

This is simply opacity for its own sake

Veteran Canadian journalist Michael Petrou told an amazing tale on Twitter on Thursday with respect to his investigation into aid Canada provided to Libyan rebels way back in 2011. At the time, he appealed one of the redactions in documents he had received through an access-to-information request. This week, seven years later, his appeal was upheld … and the foreign affairs department refused to nix the redaction anyway.

The information in question wouldn’t have caused Harper’s government any grief in 2011, let alone Trudeau’s in 2020. This is simply opacity for its own sake.

It doesn’t have to be this way. Non-journalist Canadians are often incredulous when you tell them how much more forthcoming American officialdom is with harmless information, but it’s night and day. Communications officers in the U.S. government generally exist to communicate with the public, not to intermediate between grown-adult journalists and grown-adult civil servants and politicians who are perfectly capable of calling each other’s telephones. We could do that too, if we wanted. But governments don’t want it, and nobody cares, so it doesn’t happen.

Electoral reform remains Trudeau’s signature broken promise, if only because he broke it so flamboyantly, so insultingly, and at such great expense. But at least he felt the need to humour the proportional representation fans who fell for his grift, setting up a committee and pretending to be interested in its findings. His promise to fix access-to-information procedures and timelines, his “open by default” pledge, didn’t even get that. It got chucked behind a sofa and forgotten.

Flying this blind, Canadians are relying enormously on their politicians’ honour, good intentions and backbone to stay on the straight and narrow. They should tune into the ethics or finance committee some day soon and ask themselves if that’s wise.

• Email: cselley@nationalpost.com | Twitter: cselleyCanada will continue to defend human rights in China, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau pledged Friday, after a top Chinese diplomat warned Ottawa against welcoming Hong Kong pro-democracy activists.

China's ambassador to Ottawa, Cong Peiwu, warned Canada on Thursday against granting asylum to Hong Kong activists, which he said could have consequences for the "health and security" for the 300,000 Canadians living in the theoretically autonomous Chinese territory.

The Canadian daily The Globe and Mail said Ottawa had recently granted asylum to a Hong Kong couple, which the Canadian government has neither confirmed nor denied.

"We will stand up loudly and clearly for human rights, all around the world, whether it's talking about the situation faced by the Uighurs, whether it's talking about the very concerning situation in Hong Kong, whether it's calling out China for its coercive diplomacy," said Trudeau when asked about the Chinese ambassador's comments.

But he added: "We don't look to escalate."

In a sign of the rising tensions between the two countries, Canadian Foreign Minister Francois-Philippe Champagne had earlier slammed the ambassador's remarks as "totally unacceptable and disturbing."

For his part, the new leader of the conservative opposition, Erin O'Toole, called on the Chinese diplomat "to fully retract his remarks and issue a public apology."

"Should the Ambassador fail to do so expeditiously, we expect the government to withdraw his credentials," he said.

Relations between China and Canada have been icy since December 2018 when Canada, acting on a US warrant, arrested the chief financial officer of Chinese telecoms giant Huawei.

Washington accused her of violating US sanctions against Iran and is pushing for her extradition.

Shortly after her arrest, China jailed a former Canadian diplomat, Michael Kovrig, and a Canadian businessman, Michael Spavor, on charges of spying, an act widely seen in western capitals as an act of reprisal by Beijing.