Canada's Foreign Minister François-Philippe Champagne, who is on a visit in Vilnius, met with Belarusian opposition leader Svetlana Tikhanovskaya on Friday and pledged to lend support for democratic changes in Belarus.

“You can count on Canadians to be by your side, you can count on me to be by your side and I think you can count on the international community to be with you and the people of Belarus as we seek a more democratic future,” Champagne said welcoming Tichanovskaya at one of the hotels in the Lithuanian capital.

The minister said Canada was ready to help the Coordination Council, a body created by the former presidential candidate to ensure a peaceful transition of power in Belarus.

“We are very, very pleased to be joining our voice certainly with the Coordination Council and their leader in the next steps that we need now to take and offering an opportunity for the Belarus people a future which is more democratic, which is inspiring, which is gonna rally not only the Belarus people but the international community,” Champagne said.

“In our discussions, we were looking at how can Canada contribute in terms of technical assistance, in terms of making sure that the Coordination Council would have the tools and the support necessary to bring about the transition and to provide a future which would be inspiring to the Belarus people,” he added.

Canadian Foreign Minister François-Philippe Champagne / J. Stacevičius/LRT

Tikhanovskaya said she was grateful to Canada's authorities for their support, calling Western sanctions against Minsk officials an important message to Alexander Lukashenko's regime.

“It's a sign for Belarusian criminals that they are observed by international society; that they have to think twice before committing violence,” she told the joint news conference.

Canada announced on Thursday that it extended its sanctions on the Lukashenko regime for human rights abuses. The Canadian government said the sanctions were coordinated with similar measures announced by the European Union and the United States.

The former Belarusian presidential candidate, Tikhanovskaya arrived in Lithuania in August soon after she refused to accept Alexander Lukashenko's victory in the presidential election that is seen as rigged by most European countries.

She has met with a number of Western leaders, including German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Emmanuel Macron, in recent weeks.

Read more: ‘We will act’. French president in Vilnius promises help in Belarus crisis Prime minister says Canada will ‘stand up loudly’ for human rights after China’s ambassador against welcoming Hong Kong pro-democracy activists

Justin Trudeau hits back at China after threat to Canadians in Hong Kong

Canada will continue to defend human rights in China, prime minister Justin Trudeau has pledged, after a top Chinese diplomat warned Ottawa against welcoming Hong Kong pro-democracy activists.

China’s ambassador to Ottawa, Cong Peiwu, warned Canada on Thursday against granting asylum to Hong Kong activists, which he said could have consequences for the “health and security” for the 300,000 Canadians living in the theoretically autonomous Chinese territory.

The Canadian daily The Globe and Mail said Ottawa had recently granted asylum to a Hong Kong couple, which the Canadian government has neither confirmed nor denied.

China ambassador makes veiled threat to Hong Kong-based Canadians Read more

“We will stand up loudly and clearly for human rights, all around the world, whether it’s talking about the situation faced by the Uighurs, whether it’s talking about the very concerning situation in Hong Kong, whether it’s calling out China for its coercive diplomacy,” said Trudeau on Friday when asked about the Chinese ambassador’s comments.

But he added: “We don’t look to escalate.”

In a sign of the rising tensions between the two countries, Canadian foreign minister Francois-Philippe Champagne had earlier slammed the ambassador’s remarks as “totally unacceptable and disturbing”.

For his part, the new leader of the conservative opposition, Erin O’Toole, called on the Chinese diplomat “to fully retract his remarks and issue a public apology”.

“Should the Ambassador fail to do so expeditiously, we expect the government to withdraw his credentials,” he said.

Relations between China and Canada have been icy since December 2018 when Canada, acting on a US warrant, arrested the chief financial officer of Chinese telecoms giant Huawei.

Washington accused her of violating US sanctions against Iran and is pushing for her extradition.

Shortly after her arrest, China jailed a former Canadian diplomat, Michael Kovrig, and a Canadian businessman, Michael Spavor, on charges of spying, an act widely seen in western capitals as an act of reprisal by Beijing.Prime minister says Canada will ‘stand up loudly’ for human rights after China’s ambassador against welcoming Hong Kong pro-democracy activists

Justin Trudeau hits back at China after threat to Canadians in Hong Kong

Canada will continue to defend human rights in China, prime minister Justin Trudeau has pledged, after a top Chinese diplomat warned Ottawa against welcoming Hong Kong pro-democracy activists.

China’s ambassador to Ottawa, Cong Peiwu, warned Canada on Thursday against granting asylum to Hong Kong activists, which he said could have consequences for the “health and security” for the 300,000 Canadians living in the theoretically autonomous Chinese territory.

The Canadian daily The Globe and Mail said Ottawa had recently granted asylum to a Hong Kong couple, which the Canadian government has neither confirmed nor denied.

China ambassador makes veiled threat to Hong Kong-based Canadians Read more

“We will stand up loudly and clearly for human rights, all around the world, whether it’s talking about the situation faced by the Uighurs, whether it’s talking about the very concerning situation in Hong Kong, whether it’s calling out China for its coercive diplomacy,” said Trudeau on Friday when asked about the Chinese ambassador’s comments.

But he added: “We don’t look to escalate.”

In a sign of the rising tensions between the two countries, Canadian foreign minister Francois-Philippe Champagne had earlier slammed the ambassador’s remarks as “totally unacceptable and disturbing”.

For his part, the new leader of the conservative opposition, Erin O’Toole, called on the Chinese diplomat “to fully retract his remarks and issue a public apology”.

“Should the Ambassador fail to do so expeditiously, we expect the government to withdraw his credentials,” he said.

Relations between China and Canada have been icy since December 2018 when Canada, acting on a US warrant, arrested the chief financial officer of Chinese telecoms giant Huawei.

Washington accused her of violating US sanctions against Iran and is pushing for her extradition.

Shortly after her arrest, China jailed a former Canadian diplomat, Michael Kovrig, and a Canadian businessman, Michael Spavor, on charges of spying, an act widely seen in western capitals as an act of reprisal by Beijing.HALIFAX -- Justin Trudeau called Friday for federal agencies to ensure those involved in an Indigenous-led lobster fishery are safe, a day after a Mi'kmaq chief accused him of offering words rather than action.

The prime minister's comments came in the wake of two violent clashes involving 200 people on Tuesday outside lobster pounds that handle Indigenous-caught lobster in southwestern Nova Scotia.

Chief Mike Sack of the Sipekne'katik First Nation held a news conference Thursday to condemn Ottawa's handling of the situation.

He referred to the RCMP as "useless," saying the force sent too few officers to the tense scenes in the two communities.

As for Trudeau, Sack said he had to go beyond sending comforting tweets and begin to send reinforcements for the law enforcement agencies on land and water.

Trudeau told reporters in Ottawa his government has called for an end to the violence and harassment and agreed his government must ensure adequate policing.

"We need to make sure that our police, our security officials are there to make sure everyone is protected," he said.

"We will certainly continue to work toward reconciliation with Indigenous peoples, recognizing the rights they have, established for quite some time, regarding the fisheries, and we must find a way forward that will work for everyone."

The Sipekne'katik band argues Indigenous people in Atlantic Canada and Quebec have a treaty right to fish for a moderate livelihood where and when they want, based on a 1999 Supreme Court of Canada decision that cites treaties signed by the Crown in the 1700s.

Many non-Indigenous critics, however, invoke a clarification issued four months after the 1999 ruling, stating the Mi'kmaq treaty rights would be subject to federal regulations to ensure conservation of the resource, in consultation with First Nations.

Darryl Davies, a criminologist based at Carleton University in Ottawa, said in an interview Friday that the tense confrontations are showing the RCMP don't have enough officers in place in rural detachments.

He said officers have little option but to stand by, rather than start making arrests, when there aren't enough "boots on the ground" to quell a potential riot.

Davies -- who has studied RCMP policing and training -- says this week's events illustrated a lack of planning for a situation that has shown potential to erupt for over a month, since the Indigenous fishery was launched in mid-September.

"You need resources . . . . You need to be able to show some force that will deter these people," he said.

"If you're in a mob and you arrive and see 10 officers, you'll say, 'Who's going to stop us?' "

A spokesman for the RCMP, Sgt. Andrew Joyce, said the police presence is growing now. "Our presence has increased each day since the events of Oct. 13 (Tuesday)," he wrote in an email.

Meanwhile, some Indigenous activists showed little sign of backing down in the push to create a market for the Indigenous fishery.

A group set up in front of the legislature in Halifax Friday to sell lobster, and over 100 people lined up to purchase the catch from Cheryl Maloney, a member of the Sipekne'katik band.

The sale and purchase of lobster without a federal commercial licence is considered illegal under a provincial regulation.

"The premier had to see the support for doing what's right and the support for amending their legislation to make it consistent with our rights," Maloney said.

Joel Comeau, a fisherman based in Meteghan, N.S., said in an interview that the conflict is taking an emotional toll on all concerned.

He said he is worried about his small, predominantly francophone community, because it is depressed and "emotionally shattered" by the ongoing tensions with the Indigenous fishing in St. Marys Bay.

He said Friday he is stepping down from his local position with the Maritime Fishermen's Union because he and his family have become fatigued from trying to advocate for a solution.

The 45-year-old fisher said the federal Fisheries Department has failed to include all parties in talks, and frustrations have boiled over.

"Everybody is hurting inside. My wife pulled me inside and said, 'We can't continue this fight,' " he said.

This report by The Canadian Press was first published Oct. 16, 2020.