Three people have received presumptive positive COVID-19 test results in the Northwest Territories, and health officials are warning of potential exposure to the disease in Yellowknife.

One person is from Inuvik while the other two are from Yellowknife, according to a news release issued Friday morning from N.W.T.'s office of the chief public health officer.

The cases between jurisdictions are unrelated, the release says. However the cases in Yellowknife are connected — one person travelled from within Canada, arriving by air, and subsequently transmitted it to a household member. The release says the tests came late Thursday night and an investigation is underway.

"There are some contacts that we're reaching out to to provide the advice they need," said Dr. Andy Delli-Pizzi, the territory's deputy chief public health officer, at a news conference Friday.

"I want to ensure residents across our territory, that today we are safe," he said.

"By moving quickly, we can minimize the risk of an outbreak."

Delli-Pizzi said he knows many are wondering whether this will mean a change to public health orders or a transition back to an earlier phase of the territory's reopening plan. But he said at this time, the situation is manageable and there's no need to alter the government's overall approach.

Yellowknife's Anytime Fitness was identified as one location of possible exposure. (Michael Hugall/CBC)

Exposure risk

During the briefing, Delli-Pizzi said there are two places with risk of exposure from one of the Yellowknife cases.

Anyone who was at Anytime Fitness in Yellowknife on Oct. 12 between 3 and 4:30 p.m. as well as anyone who was in the RCMP Yellowknife Detachment public waiting area on Oct. 13 between 11 and 11:30 a.m. must self-isolate at home for the next 14 days, and monitor for symptoms closely.

As well, people who were in those risk areas must contact the Yellowknife Public Health Unit at 867-767-9120 to get additional advice.

People you live with must also self-isolate for 14 days if you cannot safely self-isolate at home away from them, the release says.

"If you develop any of the following symptoms, no matter how mild, we are asking you contact the Yellowknife Public Health Unit to be assessed," the release states.

Symptoms include fever, new or worsening cough, shortness of breath, malaise (generally feeling unwell) and muscle aches. Other symptoms could include fatigue, sore throat, runny nose, headache, diarrhea, vomiting, loss of sense of smell or taste and loss of appetite.

The territory says it's opening the Yellowknife drive-thru COVID-19 testing clinic from 12 to 4 p.m. this weekend to respond to additional testing demand.

On Facebook, Anytime Fitness in Yellowknife shared the advisory with a short statement.

"We want to extend our well wishes to the infected individuals in the N.W.T during this time, we wish them a speedy recovery," it reads.

The gym currently requires clients to pre-book visits using an app.

"Anyone who was in the gym during that time is being contacted today by our team and given instructions on what to do next," the post reads.

"Public Health has confirmed that it is safe to remain open at this time as we do have proper social distancing measures in place."

Delli-Pizzi said the territory is being "extra precautionary." He added the risk of exposure at the gym is "not very high, but it's also not negligible."

"Typically there's no need to shut down a facility based on this," he said.

The RCMP also released a statement Friday evening saying services would continue uninterrupted.

"Front counter staff limit the number of persons admitted to the entrance area, and have preventative measures available including masks and hand sanitizer," the release reads.

Liquor stores in Yellowknife introduced mask policies in light of the news. (Sara Minogue/CBC)

Low risk from Inuvik case

As for the Inuvik case, the release sent Friday morning says a person started their travel in Alberta, traveled to Inuvik by road and arrived on Oct. 10. The person immediately isolated upon arrival and in accordance with the travel restrictions and self-isolation protocols, it states. The person is still isolating at home and "doing well."

An initial assessment shows there were no potential contacts, though the investigation continues. Risk of further transmission is considered to be very low. The release says there are no concerns for exposure along the person's travel route.

There is believed to be no risk of exposure in any other N.W.T. communities.

The three cases are considered presumptive since there have not yet been enough positive tests completed on the analyzers to be able to declare a case confirmed immediately yet, according to Delli-Pizzi.

Follow-up tests will be done by the territory's partner public health laboratory in Edmonton. The territory hopes to have the results by Saturday.

As of Thursday, the government was reporting a total of 5,736 tests done in the territory with 22 pending. There have been five confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the territory, and all of those people recovered months ago.

N.W.T. Premier Caroline Cochrane, right, speaks at a press conference Friday, Oct. 16 following news that three new presumptive positive cases of COVID-19 had been identified in the territory. Health and Social Services Minister Julie Green watches on. (Mario De Ciccio/Radio-Canada)

Premier: 'Second wave' is here

"The second wave that was anticipated by health officials across Canada in the early days of the pandemic is here," said Premier Caroline Cochrane during the Friday press conference.

"Southern Canada is seeing record levels of cases and it was inevitable that we would eventually see new cases in the Northwest Territories.

"The measures we put in place at the beginning of the pandemic are only going to be effective if everyone does their part. It's critical for residents and communities to remain as diligent as possible more than ever before."

Cochrane spoke alongside Health Minister Julie Green, who urged residents to remain vigilant in their efforts to follow public health orders.

"It's important to remember we won't be risk free until there are widely available treatments or vaccines," she said.

Green added that all three cases were recovering with close monitoring from health authorities.

Missed the press conference? Watch it in full below:

Liquor stores, some businesses make masks mandatory

The Inuvik, Hay River, and Yellowknife liquor stores have all introduced mandatory mask policies in light of the news. In downtown Yellowknife, customers without masks were turned away.

A manager at the store confirmed the sign went up Friday following the news of the presumptive cases.

Three Inuvik businesses owned by the same family as the liquor store also introduced a mask policy. Home Hardware Building Centre, Just Raven' Fabrics and More and Arctic Rim Powersports announced on Facebook that masks are now required. They also asked that no children be brought in.

The Nihtat Gwich'in Council has cancelled all of its scheduled programming after lunch on Friday.

This includes programs at the youth centre and the Inuvik Native Band. They said they will post again once they figure out how to deliver programming in a safe and effective manner. Crowds will rally to protest social distancing, quarantines, travel bans, and contact tracing related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic

What saw several hundreds of protestors converge at the Vancouver Art Gallery without masks last month during a pandemic is poised for a second life this weekend.

Thousands of anti-mask advocates plan to gather at the “B.C. Freedom Mega Rally” Saturday and Sunday – and not just demonstrators from the Metro Vancouver area.

Anti-mask and anti-vaccine advocates, 5G and QAnon conspiracy theorists, and far-right groups have expanded the protest call to citizens from all across the province.

Spanning over the course of two days, the rally is expected to be the “biggest rally ever in British Columbia and Western Canada,” according to lead organizer Ryan Kulbaba.









This time around, Kulbaba is coordinating car convoys for protestors travelling into Vancouver for the large-scale demonstration.

Kulbaba said the city has become a hub for Canadians to protest COVID-19 regulations including social distancing, quarantine, travel bans, and contact tracing.

During the last rally on Sept. 13, Kulbaba lauded the Vancouver Police Department (VPD) for preserving the group’s “right to protest.”

"They have been nothing but accommodating to us. They are here for our safety," he said.

Police presence expected

Though the VPD then had the ability to impose fines of up to $2,000 for those not adhering to a provincial health ban on events with more than 50 people – no tickets were doled out to organizers or those gathered without social distancing measures.

Kulbaba added that the VPD is aware of the thousands of protestors expected this weekend.

VPD spokesperson Cst. Tania Visintin told Vancouver Is Awesome the force is aware of the rally planned.

"Public safety is our number one concern. We'll be there should anything arise," she said.

The lineup of speakers includes discredited virologist Dr. Judy Mikovitz, homeopathic practitioner Dr. Robert Scott Bell, and alternative medicine practitioner Dr. Rashid Buttar.

Currently, no law forces vaccinations or face masks on B.C. citizens.Crowds will rally to protest social distancing, quarantines, travel bans, and contact tracing related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic

What saw several hundreds of protestors converge at the Vancouver Art Gallery without masks last month during a pandemic is poised for a second life this weekend.

Thousands of anti-mask advocates plan to gather at the “B.C. Freedom Mega Rally” Saturday and Sunday – and not just demonstrators from the Metro Vancouver area.

Anti-mask and anti-vaccine advocates, 5G and QAnon conspiracy theorists, and far-right groups have expanded the protest call to citizens from all across the province.

Spanning over the course of two days, the rally is expected to be the “biggest rally ever in British Columbia and Western Canada,” according to lead organizer Ryan Kulbaba.









This time around, Kulbaba is coordinating car convoys for protestors travelling into Vancouver for the large-scale demonstration.

Kulbaba said the city has become a hub for Canadians to protest COVID-19 regulations including social distancing, quarantine, travel bans, and contact tracing.

During the last rally on Sept. 13, Kulbaba lauded the Vancouver Police Department (VPD) for preserving the group’s “right to protest.”

"They have been nothing but accommodating to us. They are here for our safety," he said.

Police presence expected

Though the VPD then had the ability to impose fines of up to $2,000 for those not adhering to a provincial health ban on events with more than 50 people – no tickets were doled out to organizers or those gathered without social distancing measures.

Kulbaba added that the VPD is aware of the thousands of protestors expected this weekend.

VPD spokesperson Cst. Tania Visintin told Vancouver Is Awesome the force is aware of the rally planned.

"Public safety is our number one concern. We'll be there should anything arise," she said.

The lineup of speakers includes discredited virologist Dr. Judy Mikovitz, homeopathic practitioner Dr. Robert Scott Bell, and alternative medicine practitioner Dr. Rashid Buttar.

Currently, no law forces vaccinations or face masks on B.C. citizens.Canadian Heritage Minister Steven Guilbeault has called the practice of linking to news articles on social media sites such as Facebook “immoral” and indicated that he plans to establish a new mandated licensing requirement that would be overseen by the Copyright Board of Canada and backed by the threat of government penalties for failure to comply. Guilbeault’s plan, which is part of his “get money from web giants” legislative priority, could result in Facebook blocking all sharing of news articles in Canada, which would harm Canadian media organizations, the broader public, and contribute to increased profile for questionable or misleading sources of news.

While Guilbeault has suggested that these sources post entire articles, this is inaccurate. The reality is that these are merely links to the articles (typically with a headline and sentence or two) that send the users back to the originating site. As Andrew Coyne noted in his excellent column on this issue, not only do media organizations benefit from the free referrals, but they actively encourage their users to post links, including widgets to do so at the bottom of every article. In fact, a review of how Canadian media organizations interact with Facebook demonstrates that it goes well beyond just encouraging linking or sharing on their sites.

I recently used the CrowdTangle Chrome extension offered by Facebook to gain a better understanding of how the social media engagement works for Canadian news articles. This post – the first of several on point – looks at a single article. I started with the Toronto Star’s coverage of last month’s Speech from the Throne, particularly an article on the promise to make tech giants pay. The article was notable for opening with the following sentence:

The federal throne speech offered a good news nugget for Canada’s media industry, after a long and costly struggle against content-poaching tech giants.

So what kind of tech giant “content-poaching” took place for this article?

It turns out that virtually all the public engagement with the article – comments, likes or sharing of the article – came from a Facebook post that the Toronto Star posted itself. Of 83 public interactions (the larger number of 115 interactions including private likes or comments that are not publicly available), 81 came from the Toronto Star post. In fact, there were only two other posts of the Star article: one from News Media Canada (the lead lobby group on this issue) that generated two interactions and one from a user named Mohawk Judy, whose post did not generate any further interactions. The identical article also appeared in the Peterborough Examiner, which is owned by the Torstar. The CrowdTangle data indicates that the Peterborough Examiner itself posted a link to the article twice on Facebook, generating a total of five interactions. There were no other posts.

In short, there was no content-poaching here. Rather, the Toronto Star and the Peterborough Examiner posted multiple links themselves on Facebook and virtually all the resulting public engagement came from their posts. There were practically no other postings nor any posting of the article in full. From a legal perspective, the content actually is licensed since the Toronto Star grants Facebook a licence to host and distribute the content as part of its terms of service:

Specifically, when you share, post, or upload content that is covered by intellectual property rights on or in connection with our Products, you grant us a non-exclusive, transferable, sub-licensable, royalty-free, and worldwide license to host, use, distribute, modify, run, copy, publicly perform or display, translate, and create derivative works of your content (consistent with your privacy and application settings). This means, for example, that if you share a photo on Facebook, you give us permission to store, copy, and share it with others (again, consistent with your settings) such as service providers that support our service or other Facebook Products you use.This license will end when your content is deleted from our systems.

The media organizations actively encourage users to link to their articles on Facebook for the obvious reason that it increases traffic to their site and thereby generates ad revenue. Facebook does not charge a referral fee, a posting fee or any other fee in connection with the display of links to the newspaper article. Yet according to Guilbeault, these links (which are often licensed through the terms of service) are somehow immoral and merit a mandated licensing requirement. If enacted, the government would be establishing a regime that would grant news organizations guaranteed payments for their own posts, which helps explain why Facebook has indicated that they are likely to simply stop the linking altogether.