James Hobson's lightsaber is not a toy.

The YouTuber and his team at Hacksmith Industries in Kitchener, Ont., have created a hyper-realistic, retractable plasma lightsaber that reaches a scorching heat of 2,200 C.

"That's above the melting point of most metals," Hobson told As It Happens host Carol Off. "It's pretty dangerous."

Hobson and his team unveiled the prototype on their YouTube channel Hacksmith last week. They plan to release a second video Thursday in which they'll use the lightsaber to cut through metal siding, a Stormtrooper mannequin and a steel plate "similar to a bank vault door."

The lightsaber looks stunningly similar to the ones made famous in the Star Wars universe. And just like the iconic Jedi sword, the blade is a plasma beam that can retract and extend at the touch of a button.

That beam is generated with liquid propane gas and oxygen gas "mixed in a really fancy laminar flow gas nozzle" — a technology used to control the flow of water in jumping fountains.

"The beam is very straight and narrow, whereas if you were to just light propane on fire, you're going to get a flamethrower effect, like you'd see inside of a barbecue," Hobson said.

"But because we're using this very fancy laminar flow nozzle, we're able to get the solid-looking beam of white-hot fire, basically."

Hacksmith Industries' lightsaber prototype can change colours using different additives. (The Hacksmith /YouTube)

By adding different salts to the plasma, Hobson can change the beam's colour. For example, boric acid will make a green beam like Yoda's lightsaber, sodium chloride produces a bright yellow like Rey's, and strontium chloride will generate a bright red for those who prefer to walk on the dark side.

But unlike the Star Wars version, Hobson's isn't 100-per-cent mobile. It comes with an external power pack worn on the back, Ghostbusters style.

"Even with all our new equipment and capabilities here at Hacksmith Industries, we're still bound by the laws of thermodynamics," Hobson explains in the video.

"We don't exactly have D-size batteries capable of putting out more power than a nuclear power plant — which by the way, is what you'd need for a lightsaber to function like it does in the movies."

Hobson says the lightsaber is dangerous, and not for sale. (The Hacksmith/YouTube)

This isn't the team's first crack at a lightsaber, nor their first replica of science-fiction technology.

The whole point of the Hacksmith YouTube Channel is to replicate fictional objects using real-world technology and engineering. Previous creations include Iron Man's helmet, Captain America's shield, Batman's grappling hook and Inspector Gadget's helicopter hat.

"It's literally our bread and butter. It's what we come to work to do every day, Hobson said. "And obviously, lightsabers are one of the most famous and most popular sci-fi technologies in the world."

Hobson, who has a bachelor's degree in mechanical systems engineering, quit his previous job in 2015 to dedicate himself to Hacksmith Industries. In that time, the company has grown into a team of 14 employees, and a YouTube channel with 10.2 million subscribers.

The idea, he says, is to inspire young people to take interest in science, technology, engineering and mathematics.

"Because we've been doing it so long, we've gotten comments now, like: 'I went to engineering school because of your videos, and now I've graduated and now I'm working as an engineer.' And it's really rewarding to hear stuff like that," Hobson said.

But these are not the kind of projects you can try at home, he said — and the prototypes are not for sale.

"It's not about teaching them how to do what we're doing," Hobson said. "It's showing them what's possible through engineering. It's bringing your wildest ideas to life."

Written by Sheena Goodyear. Interview produced by Katie Geleff.

In the summer months before Matthew Raymond shot and killed four people in Fredericton, he recorded multiple videos of the sky.

For one video, Raymond focused the camera on a line of vapour among the clouds.

"That's weird," he said from behind the camera.

In painstaking detail this week, Matthew Raymond's defence lawyer has gone through hundreds of photos and videos with satanic, transphobic and conspiracy references found on Raymond's computer, including a "chemtrail" conspiracy theory which posits an unknown, organized entity is poisoning the air.

Raymond shot and killed Donnie Robichaud and Bobbie Lee Wright, then Fredericton constables Sara Burns and Robb Costello when they responded to a call of shots fired at 237 Brookside Dr. on Aug. 10, 2018.

The 50-year-old has admitted to the killing, but pleaded not guilty. His defence lawyers are arguing he was not criminally responsible on account of mental illness.

From anti-Muslim to satanic materials

Alex Pate, who reviewed evidence for the defence team, began testifying last week about what he found on Raymond's hard drives.

On Thursday, Pate said that in the summer months closer to the day Raymond shot and killed four people, he stopped downloading conspiracy theory videos.

Instead, Pate found GoPro and cellphone videos of the sky, and screen recordings of someone using an electronic tool such as Microsoft Paint to make markings on YouTube pages, and doing numerical calculations with occult numbers such as 66 and 33.

Pate's testimony paints a picture of a man whose interest in biking and video games waned as he started viewing and downloading more and more anti-Muslim, anti-Justin Trudeau, demonic and occult data.

Alex Pate, a member of Matthew Raymond's defence team, testified he reviewed tens of thousands of photos and videos on Raymond's devices between 2015 and 2018. (Ed Hunter/CBC)

In 2017 Raymond started becoming interested in ISIS and anti-Muslim material, data shows. That interest translated to the real world in June of 2017, when he protested an anti-Islamophobia bill outside the New Brunswick legislature, wearing a sandwich board that read "No Sharia-law."

But the court was shown Thursday as the year went on, Raymond's interests moved further into the conspiracy world, touching on flat earth, Illuminati and satanic references somehow related to Disney and other pop culture giants.

This was presented in the form of "countless" images of celebrities or politicians saved on his computer, with titles such as "evil" and "devil," Pate said, and deriving satanic meaning from the shapes of their hands or the look of their eyes.

He also identified multiple famous people as transgender, and related transgender people to the devil.

One video downloaded on Raymond's computer says Hollywood is run by "anti-Christ" demons and "occultists."

The data on his computer started shifting, and increasing in numbers, by the spring of 2017, Pate testified. The "demon" references continued until the summer of 2018, just before the shooting.

Pate also testified a YouTube channel, the name of which is under a publication ban, had videos that appeared to be made by Raymond.

Last week the Crown and defence agreed Raymond had a mental illness at the time of the shooting. This means to get a not-guilty verdict, the defence must prove to the jury, on a balance of probabilities, that Raymond's mental illness either stopped him from knowing the nature and consequences of his actions, or knowing what he was doing was wrong.