Canadian Heritage Minister Steven Guilbeault has called the practice of linking to news articles on social media sites such as Facebook “immoral” and indicated that he plans to establish a new mandated licensing requirement that would be overseen by the Copyright Board of Canada and backed by the threat of government penalties for failure to comply. Guilbeault’s plan, which is part of his “get money from web giants” legislative priority, could result in Facebook blocking all sharing of news articles in Canada, which would harm Canadian media organizations, the broader public, and contribute to increased profile for questionable or misleading sources of news.

While Guilbeault has suggested that these sources post entire articles, this is inaccurate. The reality is that these are merely links to the articles (typically with a headline and sentence or two) that send the users back to the originating site. As Andrew Coyne noted in his excellent column on this issue, not only do media organizations benefit from the free referrals, but they actively encourage their users to post links, including widgets to do so at the bottom of every article. In fact, a review of how Canadian media organizations interact with Facebook demonstrates that it goes well beyond just encouraging linking or sharing on their sites.

I recently used the CrowdTangle Chrome extension offered by Facebook to gain a better understanding of how the social media engagement works for Canadian news articles. This post – the first of several on point – looks at a single article. I started with the Toronto Star’s coverage of last month’s Speech from the Throne, particularly an article on the promise to make tech giants pay. The article was notable for opening with the following sentence:

The federal throne speech offered a good news nugget for Canada’s media industry, after a long and costly struggle against content-poaching tech giants.

So what kind of tech giant “content-poaching” took place for this article?

It turns out that virtually all the public engagement with the article – comments, likes or sharing of the article – came from a Facebook post that the Toronto Star posted itself. Of 83 public interactions (the larger number of 115 interactions including private likes or comments that are not publicly available), 81 came from the Toronto Star post. In fact, there were only two other posts of the Star article: one from News Media Canada (the lead lobby group on this issue) that generated two interactions and one from a user named Mohawk Judy, whose post did not generate any further interactions. The identical article also appeared in the Peterborough Examiner, which is owned by the Torstar. The CrowdTangle data indicates that the Peterborough Examiner itself posted a link to the article twice on Facebook, generating a total of five interactions. There were no other posts.

In short, there was no content-poaching here. Rather, the Toronto Star and the Peterborough Examiner posted multiple links themselves on Facebook and virtually all the resulting public engagement came from their posts. There were practically no other postings nor any posting of the article in full. From a legal perspective, the content actually is licensed since the Toronto Star grants Facebook a licence to host and distribute the content as part of its terms of service:

Specifically, when you share, post, or upload content that is covered by intellectual property rights on or in connection with our Products, you grant us a non-exclusive, transferable, sub-licensable, royalty-free, and worldwide license to host, use, distribute, modify, run, copy, publicly perform or display, translate, and create derivative works of your content (consistent with your privacy and application settings). This means, for example, that if you share a photo on Facebook, you give us permission to store, copy, and share it with others (again, consistent with your settings) such as service providers that support our service or other Facebook Products you use.This license will end when your content is deleted from our systems.

The media organizations actively encourage users to link to their articles on Facebook for the obvious reason that it increases traffic to their site and thereby generates ad revenue. Facebook does not charge a referral fee, a posting fee or any other fee in connection with the display of links to the newspaper article. Yet according to Guilbeault, these links (which are often licensed through the terms of service) are somehow immoral and merit a mandated licensing requirement. If enacted, the government would be establishing a regime that would grant news organizations guaranteed payments for their own posts, which helps explain why Facebook has indicated that they are likely to simply stop the linking altogether. TORONTO -- One of the country’s largest retailers, Walmart Canada, is no longer allowing customers to price-match items in its stores, sparking consumer outrage in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The company announced it would discontinue the ad match program in September citing a decrease in usage and delays at checkout.

As of Oct. 15, customers are no longer able to request a price match in Walmart Canada stores, a move that has not been received kindly by customers trying to save money and keep shopping trips to a minimum during the pandemic.

“Walmart ending price matching during a pandemic is very inconsiderate. Considering their longer hours and more variety compared to competitors, they’re putting families in a bind with no choice but to spend more. What happened to ‘save money, live better,’” read a tweet sent to the retailer.

In another tweet sent directly to Walmart Canada, one user wrote, “I was wondering how during a pandemic Walmart of Canada will stop price matching and have people shop at different stores or locations not very customer friendly as we try to limit our family shopping to one store.”

A spokesperson previously confirmed to CTVNews.ca over the phone that the change is not COVID-related and Walmart Canada will be emphasizing their savings pricing program known as “rollbacks.”

The company notes that if the price of a product drops after a customer makes a purchase, they are able to receive a refund for the difference within 30 days.TORONTO -- One of the country’s largest retailers, Walmart Canada, is no longer allowing customers to price-match items in its stores, sparking consumer outrage in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The company announced it would discontinue the ad match program in September citing a decrease in usage and delays at checkout.

As of Oct. 15, customers are no longer able to request a price match in Walmart Canada stores, a move that has not been received kindly by customers trying to save money and keep shopping trips to a minimum during the pandemic.

“Walmart ending price matching during a pandemic is very inconsiderate. Considering their longer hours and more variety compared to competitors, they’re putting families in a bind with no choice but to spend more. What happened to ‘save money, live better,’” read a tweet sent to the retailer.

In another tweet sent directly to Walmart Canada, one user wrote, “I was wondering how during a pandemic Walmart of Canada will stop price matching and have people shop at different stores or locations not very customer friendly as we try to limit our family shopping to one store.”

A spokesperson previously confirmed to CTVNews.ca over the phone that the change is not COVID-related and Walmart Canada will be emphasizing their savings pricing program known as “rollbacks.”

The company notes that if the price of a product drops after a customer makes a purchase, they are able to receive a refund for the difference within 30 days.Again today, October 17, people across the country are awaking to reeling images of violence and racism carried out against Mi’kmaq fishers. Many people are asking key questions such as why the RCMP has not pro-actively intervened and defended Mi’kmaq leadership and fishers, what are the economic realities of the fisheries in Mi’kma’ki, and what conservation considerations are at play.

There are a lot of moving parts to the conflict that is ongoing in St. Mary’s Bay, Nova Scotia: It is a highly-charged situation, borne out of generations of colonialism, decades of government mishandling and neglect, and months of growing racially-motivated tensions.

But one element not commonly mentioned in the news is the corporate influence on the fishing industry by Clearwater Lobster, a major offshore fishing company headed by CEO John Risley.

Facts about Clearwater

Clearwater Lobster is fishing on unceded, unsurrendered, stolen lands and waters of the Mi’kmaq Nation. Over the last 40 years, governments have favoured corporate fishing operations like Clearwater over small-scale owner-operators and Mi’kmaq fishers. Both the federal and provincial governments have given the company special treatment:

Clearwater made its own management plan for Lobster Fishing Area 41 (LFA 41) in the 1980s. The company also wrote its own fisheries management plan, conducts its own scientific research (and keeps the results private because it’s “proprietary”), and co-chairs the management board for LFA 41.

Clearwater is subject to extremely minimal outside fisheries observation. Only four per cent of its catch is reported on.

The company owns all eight lobster fishing licences in LFA 41 (though recently sold some to Membertou First Nation). This kind of consolidation isn’t allowed in any other fishing area, and no other company or person has done it.

Clearwater uses one huge fishing boat to fish LFA 41. This boat has 6,500 traps, where an owner-operator commercial boat would have up to 400 and a Mi’kmaq moderate livelihood boat would have 50.

It is practically impossible for Clearwater to drop and collect its traps within 72 hours, which is the required time limit. In January 2019, we learned that Clearwater has been fishing illegally for years, leaving traps for way longer than is allowed, causing unknown harm to lobster and other species, including endangered cod and cusk.

Clearwater fishes year-round, while Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO) regulated owner-operators fish only in a set season.

Between 2014 and 2018, Clearwater received more than $4.7 million in loans from the federal and provincial governments, both repayable and non-repayable.

Clearwater not only fishes huge quantities of lobster (1.6 million pounds per year) but also has a near monopoly on arctic surf clams.

Clearwater CEO John Risley is the richest person in Nova Scotia. He owns several other enterprises beyond Clearwater, including Ocean Nutrition, which makes dietary supplements, and Cable and Wireless Communications, which operates in the Caribbean and Central America.

Neoliberalism versus Mi’kmaq rights

The conflict in St. Mary’s Bay is an archetypal clash between a colonial state and an Indigenous nation. In this case, the Mi’kmaq Nation is working to assert its rights on its unceded, though occupied, territories. Meanwhile, the Canadian Government and its precursors have demonstrated their interest in controlling and extracting natural resources. In early settlement days, those resources were lands, fish, pelts, timber, and more; today, they expand into metals, diamonds, fossil fuels and yes, lobster. Canada consistently tries to maintain control over these resources so it can have some control over how power and wealth are distributed. The chosen economic strategy of the Canadian government is neoliberalism – using state power as a tool to extract resources and create private wealth.

This is a very different approach to natural resources than what is being put forward under the ‘moderate livelihood fishery’— a term seen throughout the current media coverage. With a moderate livelihood fishery the idea isn’t to get rich – the idea is use natural resources responsibly to enable people to live a decent life. This is the Mi’kmaq principle of Netukulimk: to “use of the natural bounty provided by the Creator” sufficient to ensure “the self-support of the individual and the community.” Read more about Netukulimk here.

In stark contrast, a colonial government’s neoliberal approach to managing fisheries, the easiest way to extract wealth from the fishery is to integrate and streamline management as much as possible. That’s what’s happened with Clearwater over the last 40 years. One company is far easier to negotiate with and regulate than several thousand small-scale fishers.

The facts about Clearwater listed above are not well known by the general public, which works to the advantage of both Clearwater and the governments by allowing Clearwater to operate to keep those facts under the radar.

What does this have to do with the conflict in St. Mary’s Bay?

In a complicated situation like this one, who benefits from the chaos? Clearly Mi’kmaq fishers are not benefiting from the violence being enacted upon them and the 20 years of government inaction on the 1999 Marshall Supreme Court decision. While it is settler fishers who are perpetrating the vandalism and violence that is occurring, they’re not benefiting from this conflict either. Their livelihoods have been put at risk by DFO mismanagement of the fishery as well.

Inshore lobster fishers have fought against Clearwater and the consolidation of the inshore fishery for a long time. Clearwater would love to control the inshore fishery, but that would mean the end to owner-operator fishing, and would mean an end to fishing communities like those around St. Mary’s Bay. The inshore fishery is the last small-scale fishery and Clearwater is trying to seize control.

Watch this two-part short documentary by Martha Steigman and Sherry Pictou: The End of the Line, focusing on the struggle of small-scale settler fishers in the Bay of Fundy, and In Defense of our Treaties, which follows members of Bear River First Nation as they try to protect their treaty rights to fish from DFO pressure.

Clearwater and both levels of Canadian government benefit from the long delay in action on the Marshall Decision because they have not had to relinquish any control over the fishery during that time, and have been able to consolidate power and access to wealth through LFA 41. Additionally, the level of confusion and unrest surrounding the conflict in St. Mary’s Bay provides a distraction from this consolidation and lack of action on Mi’kmaq rights.

It is critical that we stand with Mi’kmaq fishers trying to exercise their treaty rights (which were affirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada in 1999), and that we call on the federal government to live up to the rulings of its own Supreme Court. We should not lose focus of the fact that Mi’kmaq people are being subjected to serious intimidation, threats of violence and property damage at all hours of the day and night in St. Mary’s Bay. While we hold that in our minds and hearts, we can also recognize that the violence and vandalism is a convenient cover for the web of corporate-friendly, neoliberal policies that the federal government has been creating for decades.

On conservation

Amid this conflict, question and statements about the need to conserve lobster stocks have come up. There is lots that can be said about conservation, and one contribution to this conversation we can make is this: small-scale fisheries can provide food and livelihoods for communities while protecting the integrity of the environment. It is hard to imagine how consolidation and massive Clearwater-type fishing can be sustainable – 4,600 traps at a time in sensitive deep-water ecosystems, leaving traps in the water for so long that many animals get stuck inside and die. These are the kinds of fishing practices that conservation groups tell consumers about to get them to avoid purchasing the products.

By pushing towards this large-scale corporate model of fishing and refusing to contend with treaty rights for more than 20 years, the federal government is putting Mi’kmaw lives at risk, forcing settler fishers into a corner, and permitting Clearwater’s pillaging of the ocean – the very one the federal government is claiming to protect.

To learn more

To stay informed about what is going in St. Mary’s Bay, also known as the Kespukwitk district of Mi’kma’ki, we suggest following:

Ku’ku’kwes News – Independent Indigenous News at kukukwes.com/@mgoogoo. Note: Ku’ku’kwes News is subscriber-funded. Please consider subscribing so they can continue reporting on this vital issue!

Nova Scotia Advocate provides a voice for the many Nova Scotians who too often are ignored. Visit: nsadvocate.org @RobertDevet.

Aboriginal People’s Television Network at https://www.aptnnews.ca/ @APTNNews.

Robin Tress is the Climate and Social Justice Campaigner with the Council of Canadians.

This commentary was first published by the Council of Canadians.