Article content

Nicola Moore recently released her first song, “The Arrow.” A singer-songwriter, peer advocate at the Hamilton Community Food Centre, and single mother of three children under nine, she’s made the most of any pandemic-induced “lulls” in her life by writing music.

“I could sit here and get Ontario Works payments or I could do something about it and change my life, which is what I’m trying to do right now,” says Moore. “Advocacy and singing are my way out.“

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or One in seven Canadians is experiencing food insecurity during COVID-19, and its toll is heavier than hunger: report Back to video

A first-time gardener on a community plot, Moore is ecstatic when describing her harvest: cucumbers, green beans, lettuce, squash, tomatoes, a variety of herbs and an abundance of kale. She’s also in the midst of a project at work, illustrating how to spin a can of chickpeas a multitude of ways so others — like herself — can transform the canned items they get on monthly trips to the food bank.

“Because I am them,” says Moore. “They are me.”

Photo by Hamilton Community Food Centre

Prior to the pandemic, according to a report released by the non-profit Community Food Centres Canada (CFCC), an estimated 4.5 million Canadians experienced food insecurity. During COVID-19, that number has increased by 39 per cent; disproportionately affecting Black, Indigenous and northern communities. As a result of the strains of the pandemic, one in seven people — including Moore — is food insecure; unable to afford enough food, or worried about running out without the means to buy more. U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officers at the Port of Buffalo seized more than a tonne of cannabis in a commercial shipment this week coming in from Canada.

This is the most recent in a string of large seizures since the border was closed to all but essential traffic in the wake of the global pandemic.

On October 15, CBP officers discovered 2,145 vacuum-sealed one pound packages of cannabis in a commercial shipment of 20 pallets during the internal inspection. It was also determined that the marijuana had an estimated street value of more than $8 million dollars, at a value of about $5 a gram.

US border authorities now say they have captured more than 40,000 pounds of cannabis coming in from Canada since last October, valued at nearly $100 million US.

Both US and Canadian authorities have intercepted numerous large cannabis shipments at or destined for the US border since the two countries closed their border to all non essential traffic in March due to the global pandemic. The bulk of seized shipments has been since the border closure in March.

“Our CBP officers remain enforcement focused and driven and this latest large load marijuana seizure is proof of that”, said Port Director Jennifer De La O. “Their efforts have produced record setting results for narcotics seizures within the Buffalo Field Office exemplifying their dedication to the CBP mission.”U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officers at the Port of Buffalo seized more than a tonne of cannabis in a commercial shipment this week coming in from Canada.

This is the most recent in a string of large seizures since the border was closed to all but essential traffic in the wake of the global pandemic.

On October 15, CBP officers discovered 2,145 vacuum-sealed one pound packages of cannabis in a commercial shipment of 20 pallets during the internal inspection. It was also determined that the marijuana had an estimated street value of more than $8 million dollars, at a value of about $5 a gram.

US border authorities now say they have captured more than 40,000 pounds of cannabis coming in from Canada since last October, valued at nearly $100 million US.

Both US and Canadian authorities have intercepted numerous large cannabis shipments at or destined for the US border since the two countries closed their border to all non essential traffic in March due to the global pandemic. The bulk of seized shipments has been since the border closure in March.

“Our CBP officers remain enforcement focused and driven and this latest large load marijuana seizure is proof of that”, said Port Director Jennifer De La O. “Their efforts have produced record setting results for narcotics seizures within the Buffalo Field Office exemplifying their dedication to the CBP mission.”Party leaders' responses to a question about white privilege in this week's B.C. election debate have left some observers with big questions about a lack of understanding on issues of racism.

During Tuesday's debate, the leaders were asked to explain how they've reckoned with their own privileged positions as white people.

In one of the most talked about moments of the night, NDP Leader John Horgan spoke of playing lacrosse with Indigenous young people and suggested, "I did not see colour."

June Francis, co-chair of the Hogan's Alley Society board of directors, described that answer as "stunning" in light of this summer's protests over anti-Black racism, and said it demonstrates the depth of Horgan's privilege.

"It means that he can walk through the world and never confront racism," she told CBC.

WATCH | NDP Leader John Horgan says he regrets hurting people with comments:

NDP Leader John Horgan apologizes for race comment made during debate 1:03 John Horgan says he regrets saying he didn't see colour growing up on Vancouver Island when asked about how he's reckoning with his white privilege. Horgan says he's promising to do better in the future. 1:03

Francis said that as premier, it was Horgan's job to govern on behalf of everyone who lives in B.C., and if he's blind to race, he's also blind to the systemic racism that many British Columbians live with.

Horgan apologized for his comment immediately after the debate, calling it inappropriate and saying, "I'll never fully understand, as a white person, the lived reality of systemic racism. I'm listening, learning and I'll keep working every day to do better."

This is the answer I wish I gave on stage. Saying "I don’t see colour" causes pain and makes people feel unseen. I’m sorry. I’ll never fully understand, as a white person, the lived reality of systemic racism. I’m listening, learning, and I’ll keep working every day to do better. <a href="https://t.co/Rbr7h0JOyh">pic.twitter.com/Rbr7h0JOyh</a> —@jjhorgan

But for Genevieve Fuji Johnson, a political science professor at Simon Fraser University, that apology suggests Horgan still doesn't quite understand the issue.

"So often, colour blindness is synonymous for words like neutral and fair, and to make the suggestion that beliefs and behaviours and laws and policies and institutions are neutral or fair just totally glosses over the myriad of forms of oppression and indeed violence that racialized people and minorities face at the hands of supposedly neutral laws and institutions," she said.

Liberal Leader Andrew Wilkinson's answer to the same question was also troubling for some of those who watched the debate. In his response, the Liberal leader told a story about working as a doctor and delivering an Indigenous baby who was later named after him.

Francis said Wilkinson's answer didn't show any engagement with the issues that Indigenous people face in B.C.

"Instead, he told this story about himself and how glorious his experience was," she said. "It was deeply troubling, actually."

Wilkinson expanded on his comments Wednesday at a campaign stop in Kitimat, on B.C.'s North Coast.



"In medical practice, I became very much aware of the particular struggles of Indigenous people in dealing with the health-care system and in dealing with society's other structures,'' Wilkinson said. "The idea that people in our society are somehow treated differently because of the colour of their skin or where they grew up or who their parents are is not acceptable.''

He said he grew up fortunate as a white male and it wasn't until his teenage years that he realized he received different treatment than others.



"It's wrong. It's not fair,'' said Wilkinson. "I've suggested in the [Liberal] platform there should be anti-racism training for everybody in the provincial government.''

From right, NDP Leader John Horgan, Green Leader Sonia Furstenau and Liberal Leader Andrew Wilkinson are shown preparing for Tuesday's debate. (Jonathan Hayward/The Canadian Press)

Green Party Leader Sonia Furstenau's response during the debate earned praise from some corners. Furstenau acknowledged the existence of systemic racism in the criminal justice system.

"We aren't all equal. I wish we were, but we're not," she said.

Francis said that answer was "fantastic" but that she remains concerned about the lack of diversity among Green Party candidates.

Fuji Johnson, on the other hand, said Furstenau missed an opportunity to discuss how systemic racism is pervasive in all Canadian institutions, from health care to education.

"I gave her a C, maybe a C+. I would say her response was adequate," Fuji Johnson said.

Indigenous issues missing from debate

Meanwhile, there were some other concerns about the debate's lack of focus on issues that matter to Indigenous communities.

CBC journalist Wawmeesh Hamilton pointed out that the only mention of reconciliation came during discussion of energy projects.

"I began to wonder, with no mention of it, if we reconciled. ... Did I miss something?" he said.

There was also nothing about the unique concerns of urban Indigenous people, who represent the majority of the Indigenous population in B.C.

CBC journalist Wawmeesh Hamilton says reconciliation should have been a major focus in the B.C. leaders' debate. (Ben Nelms/CBC)

In a similar vein, the Coalition on Murdered and Missing Indigenous Women and Girls in B.C. released an open letter Wednesday expressing "grave concern and disappointment" that none of the parties have released plans to implement the Calls for Justice of the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls.

Hamilton argued that the debate should have had an entire section devoted to the question of reconciliation. But as he noted, no Indigenous journalists were included on the panel that drafted questions for the party leaders.

"A step back was taken where reconciliation and Indigenous issues were concerned," he said. "Some soul searching needs to be done, stock should be taken and corrections need to be made."

For more stories about the experiences of Black Canadians — from anti-Black racism to success stories within the Black community — check out Being Black in Canada, a CBC project Black Canadians can be proud of. You can read more stories here.