A recent COVID-19 outbreak at a southern Ontario fitness studio is illustrating how certain indoor settings can provide a perfect storm for superspreading events.

The studio, a downtown Hamilton Spinco location, has been connected to 69 cases of COVID-19 as of Wednesday, despite screening customers, operating at 50 per cent capacity and keeping the recommended two-metre radius around bikes.

So how did so many cases originate there? And does it raise concern about how the novel coronavirus can spread in a gym setting?

"Certainly, this event makes you wonder that," said Dr. Matthew Oughton, an infectious disease expert at Jewish General Hospital and McGill University in Montreal.

"I can see where this could lead to perhaps gyms having serious restrictions placed on them if they want to avoid similar superspreading events."

Ontario and Quebec recently reintroduced closures at gyms in virus hot spots, including Toronto, Montreal and Ottawa, for a four-week period to help limit spread.

And Dr. Barbara Yaffe, Ontario's associate chief medical officer, said Wednesday authorities are reviewing guidelines for fitness studios across the province after the Hamilton outbreak.

Oughton said gyms and fitness studios have a few strikes against them when it comes to tailoring them for the pandemic.

Heavier breathing expels droplets farther

They're operating almost exclusively indoors, which makes for poorer ventilation, and patrons aren't usually masked when engaging in strenuous exercise.

High-impact activity also leads to heavier breathing, which means droplets are being expelled from peoples' mouths at an accelerated rate — and being propelled farther distances.

An employee at a Gatineau, Que., gym wipes down equipment in late June during the pandemic. When people are exercising vigorously, the volume and distance of what comes out of their mouth and their lungs differs than when they speak normally. (Frédéric Pepin/Radio-Canada)

Dr. Andrew Morris, a professor of medicine at the University of Toronto, likens it to throwing a ball. The harder you throw, the farther it goes.

"We still don't have a perfect understanding of this," he said. "But we do know that when people are exercising vigorously, the volume and distance of what comes out of their mouth and their lungs is dramatically different than when somebody is speaking [in a normal way]."

WATCH | Dr. Theresa Tam, Canada's top doctor, on aerosol transmission:

COVID-19 transmission by aerosol or droplets? 1:00 Chief Public Health Officer Dr. Theresa Tam admits that guidance regarding the transmission of COVID-19 may have to change. 1:00

If people are shouting, cheering or singing — which often happens in a spin class where music is blaring and instructors spew out encouragement to keep participants' intensity up — that can make things worse.

"And if you mix that in with a space that may not have proper ventilation, there is risk for a lot of spread to occur," Morris said.

Dr. Ilan Schwartz, an infectious disease expert with the University of Alberta, said spin classes may pose more risk than other group settings because of the bikes themselves. In theory, the rapidly spinning wheels could aerosolize droplets by flinging them farther distances.

"I haven't seen any studies of this, but theoretically it makes sense," he said.

"I think going to the gym isn't necessarily high-risk, unless individuals are close together and there's poor ventilation. But there might be specific circumstances that could make it higher-risk, where something with fast, moving parts [or] a rapidly moving fan can generate aerosols as well."

Holland Philpott participates in an outdoor yoga class in a dome to facilitate distancing and proper protocols to prevent the spread of COVID-19, in Toronto in June. (Carlos Osorio/Reuters)

But Morris said the real danger comes when people are spewing out droplets in a poorly ventilated space.

Fitness class dangers not equal

The prolonged length of time spent in a spin class, typically one hour, and the number of people in the room will also impact risk.

Not all fitness classes will present the same dangers, he added.

A low-impact yoga class where hearts aren't racing and breathing is kept under control seems safer than a high-impact spin class but not if it's crowded and poorly ventilated.

A dance class, where participants are crisscrossing into airspace previously occupied by others, can be risky as well in the same environment.

A lone jogger, wearing a protective face mask, runs with her dog in the Tuileries Garden in Paris as a lockdown is imposed in March. Masks, while uncomfortable when working out, can be worn. (Charles Platiau/Reuters)

"Assuming that room has relatively poor ventilation, that's the kind of setting where yes, you'd be concerned about the potential for transmission," Oughton said. "But if you had the exact same room with an excellent HVAC system, or the same room where windows were kept open … those are the kinds of things you could do to reduce the risk."

Morris said finding ways to make these activities safer is always better than banning them.

Masks, while uncomfortable when working out, can be worn in most instances, he said. Improving ventilation and limiting numbers of people even further can also help.

"If we're going to be successful, we can't keep telling people they can't have these things," Morris said. "We need to be able to point to something and say, 'This is the better choice."'

Schwartz said frequent hand-cleaning and the sanitization of equipment should also be kept in mind, even if surface transmission isn't as concerning as it was earlier in the pandemic.

"And for now, I think it's probably a good idea to avoid spin classes," he added.

Oughton foresees people taking their workouts outdoors in new ways over the winter if gyms and fitness centres are deemed too risky.

That could mean dusting off the skates or ski boots.

"I think this is going to re-emphasize the safety and the necessity of being able to get some activity and fresh air outside," he said.

"Hopefully, we find new appreciation for outdoor winter sports that we can all enjoy."Canada's Foreign Minister François-Philippe Champagne, who is on a visit in Vilnius, met with Belarusian opposition leader Svetlana Tikhanovskaya on Friday and pledged to lend support for democratic changes in Belarus.

“You can count on Canadians to be by your side, you can count on me to be by your side and I think you can count on the international community to be with you and the people of Belarus as we seek a more democratic future,” Champagne said welcoming Tichanovskaya at one of the hotels in the Lithuanian capital.

The minister said Canada was ready to help the Coordination Council, a body created by the former presidential candidate to ensure a peaceful transition of power in Belarus.

“We are very, very pleased to be joining our voice certainly with the Coordination Council and their leader in the next steps that we need now to take and offering an opportunity for the Belarus people a future which is more democratic, which is inspiring, which is gonna rally not only the Belarus people but the international community,” Champagne said.

“In our discussions, we were looking at how can Canada contribute in terms of technical assistance, in terms of making sure that the Coordination Council would have the tools and the support necessary to bring about the transition and to provide a future which would be inspiring to the Belarus people,” he added.

Canadian Foreign Minister François-Philippe Champagne / J. Stacevičius/LRT

Tikhanovskaya said she was grateful to Canada's authorities for their support, calling Western sanctions against Minsk officials an important message to Alexander Lukashenko's regime.

“It's a sign for Belarusian criminals that they are observed by international society; that they have to think twice before committing violence,” she told the joint news conference.

Canada announced on Thursday that it extended its sanctions on the Lukashenko regime for human rights abuses. The Canadian government said the sanctions were coordinated with similar measures announced by the European Union and the United States.

The former Belarusian presidential candidate, Tikhanovskaya arrived in Lithuania in August soon after she refused to accept Alexander Lukashenko's victory in the presidential election that is seen as rigged by most European countries.

She has met with a number of Western leaders, including German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Emmanuel Macron, in recent weeks.

Read more: ‘We will act’. French president in Vilnius promises help in Belarus crisis