Article content

QUEBEC — The new leader of the Parti Québécois on Thursday criticized the Legault government’s decision to provide additional funding to anglophone post-secondary institutions in Montreal, arguing that too little is being done to defend the French language.

“The Quebec government, the CAQ, is investing $750 million to expand Dawson, expand McGill University, and thus accelerate an already present phenomenon of anglicization of students,” Paul St-Pierre Plamondon said.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or PQ leader attacks funding of anglo schools, defends his McGill studies Back to video

Despite the fact there are more francophones and allophones than anglophones in Montreal, English CEGEP students will outnumber French CEGEP students in the city by next year, he asserted. St-Pierre Plamondon wants the number of English students to be equivalent to their percentage of the population.

“We need to address this to make it proportionate,” he said.

The actions of the ruling Coalition Avenir Quebec (CAQ), which purports to be a nationalist party that defends the French language against creeping anglicization, have failed to match their words, St-Pierre Plamondon added. A campaign called “No BC for Xi” has been launched, asking candidates to pledge support for human rights,and to not accept donations from Beijing or its proxies. Paul Johnson reportsA campaign called “No BC for Xi” has been launched, asking candidates to pledge support for human rights,and to not accept donations from Beijing or its proxies. Paul Johnson reportsNEW EDINBURGH, NS – A group of RCMP officers watched helplessly as white lobster fisherman broke into an Indigenous fishery, vandalized property, and set fire to a van.

Armed with semi-automatic pistols and protected by bullet proof vests emblazoned with the words ‘POLICE’, the twelve law-enforcement officers wondered when it was appropriate to alert the authorities.

“Are death threats and hate crimes illegal in Canada?” question Sgt. Allen Smith of the local RCMP detachment while watching several hate crimes unfold. “My brother knows a cop, so maybe I’ll call him before I report this.”

The thin blue line of bystanders couldn’t look away as they did nothing to protect people and their treaty rights affirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada.

According to sources, other members of the police force said they were too busy stalking a person of colour at a local grocery store.