Two hours after WestJet announced on Wednesday that it was curtailing its flights to and from Atlantic Canada, an email went out to all MPs and senators from Liberal MP Chris Bittle, parliamentary secretary to Transport Minister Marc Garneau.

"The COVID-19 pandemic has had a tremendous impact on all aspects of the Canadian economy, but few industries have been more negatively impacted than the air sector," Bittle wrote in a letter first obtained by Radio-Canada.

"Many of you have reached out to us to share your thoughts about the current impact of COVID-19 on the air sector. At this stage, we would like to hear from all parliamentarians [on] what is required to support a robust air sector in Canada."

Last month's throne speech promised "further support for industries that have been the hardest hit, including travel," and the government's consultations on support for the air sector apparently were due to start this week.

While demands for government aid to the air travel sector have been building for months, WestJet's regional retreat will drive those demands to a new level.

For the federal government, the case for doing something to prop up airlines and airports might be stronger than the case for doing nothing. But even if the government wants — or needs — to intervene, it still has to work out a way to do so that it can defend politically.

Bubble trouble

P.E.I. Premier Dennis King was among those calling on the federal government to take action on Wednesday. But it's the region's own "Atlantic bubble" pandemic policy — which imposes registration requirements on travellers from outside of Atlantic Canada and compels them to self-isolate for 14 days upon arrival in the region — that has caused the demand for flights in and out of the region to crater.

The Liberals probably don't want to be blamed if reductions in air service across the country become permanent. And sure enough, New Brunswick Premier Blaine Higgs told CBC's Power & Politics that he came away from a conversation with Intergovernmental Affairs Minister Dominic LeBlanc on Wednesday with the impression that "something's going to happen" for the ailing industry.

WATCH | Atlantic premiers concerned as WestJet ends most flights in region:

Atlantic premiers concerned as WestJet ends most flights in region 9:52 Premiers are expressing concern after WestJet announced it would shut down most of its operations in Atlantic Canada. 9:52

The federal response to the pandemic has not ignored the country's largest companies. All businesses have been able to access the federal wage subsidy. In May, the Liberals rolled out a targeted loan program known as the Large Employer Emergency Financing Facility (LEEFF).

WestJet has made use of the wage subsidy; Richard Bartrem, VP of marketing communications at WestJet, called it "terrifically helpful." WestJet has not sought assistance through the LEEFF program.

"The conditions that were placed [on] it just made it unwieldy in terms of our ability to recover from the pandemic," Bartrem said.

Critics have claimed LEEFF was rolled out too late and offers loans at terms less generous than what is available in the private sector. (When it was introduced, then-finance minister Bill Morneau called the program an option of "last resort" — so it might have been designed to not be popular.)

Only one company has been approved for a LEEFF loan to date, according to the federal government. Not long after the federal government announced that loan to Gateway Casinos (which operates 26 facilities across Canada), Conservative finance critic Pierre Poilievre was on his feet in the House of Commons ripping into the decision as an irresponsible use of public funds.

That's the risk a government takes whenever it offers help to specific firms or industries — even in the midst of a global economic crisis.

The nationalization route

Transport Minister Marc Garneau has had to fend off questions already about compelling airlines to refund customers for flights that were cancelled by the pandemic.

At the time, Garneau's stated reason for not forcing airlines to offer refunds seemed practical. Some struggling airlines might have collapsed completely if they were forced to pay back that money, he said. But if (or when) the federal government offers airlines support, the political conflict over refunds will come roaring back.

When Chrystia Freeland became finance minister in August, the National Airlines Council of Canada, which represents major carriers, wrote to her to outline a request for financial support in the form of "loans, loan guarantees or direct assistance." Airline unions have asked for $7 billion in federal loans.

The airlines also want "a national framework to ease interprovincial travel restrictions ... reciprocal border agreements with targeted safe countries" and the deployment of rapid COVID-19 testing.

Other countries have moved already to rescue their national carriers — in some cases through outright nationalization. The German government, for instance, now owns 20 per cent of Lufthansa. In Canada, any nationalization presumably would have to involve both Air Canada and WestJet.

LEEFF's limitations notwithstanding, the program's design suggests the government knew that it would have to justify and defend any effort to bail out a major corporate entity. LEEFF loan recipients have to abide by conditions that include restrictions on executive compensation and a requirement for climate-risk disclosure. Perhaps new conditions would help make loans for airlines more politically acceptable.

The political downside to bailouts

But even if the Trudeau government changed the terms of LEEFF to make it more industry-friendly, it still could be left to explain why the airline industry — or any other group of wounded firms — deserves special attention right now.

The Liberals have avoided taking a sector-specific approach to pandemic relief to date. If they start providing sector-specific assistance now, the floodgates will open — other sectors will demand the same assistance, or at least call on the Liberals to explain where they're drawing the line and why.

The government's throne speech specifically mentioned one avenue for assistance: supporting regional routes for airlines. "It is essential that Canadians have access to reliable and affordable regional air services," the speech said. "This is an issue of equity, of jobs, and of economic development."

That's a justification for targeted support. Would that be enough?

There's also the question of timing. As Premier Higgs acknowledged in his interview with Power & Politics, financial support will be of limited use as long as large numbers of people are uncomfortable with the idea of flying — and have nowhere to go.

Free-market disciples might turn their noses up at all of this, but the Trudeau government probably doesn't see this as the right moment to insist on laissez-faire economics. And perhaps the other federal parties will be reluctant to make the case for doing nothing as well.

For Trudeau, the challenge is to come up with an approach that makes things better — without making his government's political burden significantly heavier. The federal Canadian government has allocated US$15.11 million (C$20 million) for investments in mini nuclear power plants as part of efforts to reduce the country's carbon footprint.

The money will be provided to an Ontario-based company, Terrestrial Energy, to develop the modular reactors and bring them to market, CBC reported.

"By helping to bring these small reactors to market, we are supporting significant environmental and economic benefits, including generating energy with reduced emissions, highly skilled job creation and Canadian intellectual property development," Canada's innovation minister said, as quotes by the news outlet.

According to Atomic Energy Canada, the mini reactors, which are small enough that they can be built in one place and then transported and assembled at another, will be useful in three main areas. One of these is as a replacement for coal-powered generation capacity due to be retired. Another use is to supply power to off-grid projects in industries such as mining and oil sands extraction. The third use of the reactors would serve as replacements for diesel fuel as a source of electricity and heating for remote Canadian communities.

Terrestrial Energy has designed what it calls an Integral Molten Salt Reactor, which, according to the company, "will provide high-efficiency on-grid electricity generation, and its high-temperature operation has many other industry uses, such as zero-carbon hydrogen production."

Canada is the second-largest producer of uranium in the world, according to the Canadian government, and the fourth-largest exporter of the commodity. Nuclear energy accounted for 15 percent of the country's electricity production in 2018.

The money granted to Terrestrial Energy is the first government investment in small modular reactors and comes ahead of the announcement of a roadmap, to be released by the Natural Resources Ministry, that shows how the technology could help Canada reduce its carbon footprint. The country has pledged to reduce its emission levels by a third over the next 10 years.

By Irina Slav for Oilprice.com

More Top Reads From Oilprice.com:The federal Canadian government has allocated US$15.11 million (C$20 million) for investments in mini nuclear power plants as part of efforts to reduce the country's carbon footprint.

The money will be provided to an Ontario-based company, Terrestrial Energy, to develop the modular reactors and bring them to market, CBC reported.

"By helping to bring these small reactors to market, we are supporting significant environmental and economic benefits, including generating energy with reduced emissions, highly skilled job creation and Canadian intellectual property development," Canada's innovation minister said, as quotes by the news outlet.

According to Atomic Energy Canada, the mini reactors, which are small enough that they can be built in one place and then transported and assembled at another, will be useful in three main areas. One of these is as a replacement for coal-powered generation capacity due to be retired. Another use is to supply power to off-grid projects in industries such as mining and oil sands extraction. The third use of the reactors would serve as replacements for diesel fuel as a source of electricity and heating for remote Canadian communities.

Terrestrial Energy has designed what it calls an Integral Molten Salt Reactor, which, according to the company, "will provide high-efficiency on-grid electricity generation, and its high-temperature operation has many other industry uses, such as zero-carbon hydrogen production."

Canada is the second-largest producer of uranium in the world, according to the Canadian government, and the fourth-largest exporter of the commodity. Nuclear energy accounted for 15 percent of the country's electricity production in 2018.

The money granted to Terrestrial Energy is the first government investment in small modular reactors and comes ahead of the announcement of a roadmap, to be released by the Natural Resources Ministry, that shows how the technology could help Canada reduce its carbon footprint. The country has pledged to reduce its emission levels by a third over the next 10 years.

By Irina Slav for Oilprice.com

More Top Reads From Oilprice.com:CAUTION: This story contains graphic content related to allegations of sexual assault and might be upsetting to some readers.

If you or someone you know are victims of sexual violence, you can contact Crisis Services Canada, a 24/7 hotline, at 1-833-456-4566 or you can find local support through the Ontario Coalition of Rape Crisis Centres; The Government of Canada has also compiled a list of sexual misconduct support centres. If you are under 18 and need help, contact the Kid’s Help Phone online or at 1-800-668-6868.

It took Peter Luci nearly 30 years to find the strength to confront the Catholic Priest he tells us raped him as a teen – and when he finally did – his alleged abuser, Father Leo Campbell, mysteriously died.

“He was surrounded by boys and I couldn’t believe it. I was just beside myself.”

A chance encounter with Fr. Campell at a friend’s wedding spurred Luci to finally open up about the trauma he says he endured as a 15-year-old, decades earlier.

“I never expected to see him that night,” says Luci. “He was surrounded by boys and I couldn’t believe it. I was just beside myself.”

“I went up to him and I said, ‘Remember me?’ and it was like in one of those movies. He took a step back, three steps and started to tremble. He did remember me. There was no doubt, it was obvious, but he denied it.”

Luci says he was overcome with guilt and anger when he saw Fr. Campbell surrounded by children. He felt that his silence about his own alleged abuse enabled a man he saw as a predator to access more potential victims.

The face-to-face encounter led Luci to finally tell his wife about the abuse he says he endured when he was a student at St. Mary’s College, a high school in Sault Ste. Marie run by an order of Catholic Priests known as the Basilians.

“It escalated to the point where he was raping me.”

“I knew it wasn’t right. But I didn’t know who to turn to or what to do,” says Luci. “It escalated to the point where he was raping me.”

“He’d ejaculate in my mouth, he’d ejaculate outside my mouth. He’d have a towel, or he’d clean it up afterwards. And it progressed.”

In the mid-2000s, Luci joined a sex abuse survivors’ support group, which led him to psychotherapist Lynne MacDonell, who has treated hundreds of men who are victims of abuse.

“It takes so much courage to come forward,” says MacDonell. “Men who come forward look back on that and they don’t see themselves as boys – they’re adult men [asking,] ‘Why did I let that happen to me?’ They’re full of shame, they’re full of remorse, they’re blaming themselves.”

As younger survivors began to join Luci’s support group, Luci told MacDonell he still felt guilty that he never came forward as a victim.

“He said he felt that if he didn’t come forward and later found out that another boy was being abused, he would be to blame,” MacDonell explains.

In early January 2008 – years after the encounter at the wedding — MacDonell brought Luci’s claims to the Basilians, whose headquarters are in Toronto. The order of priests told her they take all allegations of abuse seriously and arranged to investigate.

On January 30, a Basilian Father took Luci’s statement, noting “obviously he has suffered trauma that still affects him in a significant way.” On the same day, the priest interviewed Fr. Campbell, who at the time was 68 years old and retired from teaching.

Fr. Campbell told the investigator he didn’t remember Luci, and categorically denied that any abuse took place. The investigating priest also asked Fr. Campbell if he was attracted to young men. After hesitating he answered “yes, but more as a father-son relationship, not sexually.”

As the interview wrapped up, the Basilian investigator noted that Fr. Campbell appeared depressed and he was “concerned about how this would impact his future as a priest.”

On February 11, the Basilian investigator submitted his report to the order’s leader. In it, he stated he found Luci’s allegations to be credible and recommended that Fr. Campbell be sent for another mental health assessment.

CityNews reached out to the Basilians multiple times, asking for an interview with one of their most senior priests, Vicar General, David Katulski. Our requests were denied. Eventually, we sent a detailed list of questions for an official response. The order declined to answer questions about specific individuals or events. Their lawyer did forward a statement.

“There has never been any doubt or misunderstanding that sexual abuse of a child is, and always has been, wrong,” the Basilians write.

The statement says historically, attraction to children wasn’t well understood, which contributed to the thinking that sex abuse “was a moral failing, and could be addressed by deeper spiritual focus and commitment.”

“Treatment providers often treated those against whom allegations of sexual abuse had been made and, believing them to be cured, cleared them to return to work.”

The mystery of Fr. Campbell’s death

Three days later, Luci received a bombshell phone call – Fr. Campbell had died.

Luci says he asked about the circumstances of Fr. Campbell’s death, but was never given details. His death was described as a “sudden passing” in a memorial in the alumni newsletter of St. Michael’s College School. Despite allegations that began to pile up early in his career, Fr. Campbell was still appointed principal of the Basilian-run private school in Toronto and later brought back as head of chaplaincy and to teach religion.

MacDonell believes that understanding how Fr. Campbell died would help Luci gain some measure of peace.

“It would have helped him so much,” she says.

The priest’s death brought Luci conflicting emotions.

“I felt responsible for his death, and that was when I started to see him coming to me, in my head when I fall asleep,” he says. “He’s not there to see what he did to me and others. He’s not there, he’s just gone. I’m here though and I have to live with what he did. That’s not fair.”

The Basilians tell CityNews that Fr. Campbell died of heart failure. In his obituary posted in the Basilian Newsletter, Fr. Campbell was remembered as a priest who “had a special ability to reach out to the disenfranchised and alienated.”

His funeral was held at Holy Rosary Church, where he had once served as associate pastor. His colleague, Fr. John Malo, gave his eulogy, and Campbell is buried in the Basilian plot at Holy Cross Cemetery in Thornhill.

In the months following his death, St. Michael’s College established a bursary, “in honour and memory of Fr. Leo Campbell, whose musical talents and contributions to the St. Michael’s community are missed.”

The Basilians also began paying for Luci’s psychotherapy.

In 2009, Luci filed a lawsuit against Fr. Campbell’s estate and the Basilians. It was settled in 2015 for $250,000, and without any admission of liability from the order of priests.

When St. Mike’s became aware of the settlement, the school took Fr. Campbell’s name off the bursary.

In a statement to CityNews, the school says to the knowledge of current administration, the Basilian Fathers didn’t tell school administration about the allegations against Fr. Campbell while he was teaching there.

Luci is adamant that, for him, coming forward was about coming to terms with what he says happened to him.

“There’s no balance left after that, everything’s thrown into chaos.”

“It destroyed all my life. All aspects. My wife. Our sex life. Everything,” he says. “Just now after all the years and after all this help, I’ve started to feel strong enough to be able to talk.”

If you or someone you know are victims of sexual violence, you can contact Crisis Services Canada, a 24/7 hotline, at 1-833-456-4566 or you can find local support through the Ontario Coalition of Rape Crisis Centres; The Government of Canada has also compiled a list of sexual misconduct support centres. If you are under 18 and need help, contact the Kid’s Help Phone online or at 1-800-668-6868.