Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said that applying for the new Canada Recovery Benefit would be "simple" and that no Canadian would be left behind in the transition to a new pandemic benefit.

But some say the application process has been deeply frustrating and they still don't know when — or even if — they'll get the money.

Hajar Pittman told CBC News the application process has been a nightmare.

"I've never felt this hopeless," said the Brampton, Ont. mother of two toddlers. She was on maternity leave when the pandemic hit. She was laid off from her job in the airline industry in June and collected the Canada Emergency Response Benefit (CERB) — the benefit replaced by the CRB — throughout the summer.

Pittman said that when she first tried to apply for the new Canada Recovery Benefit (CRB) on Monday, she got an error message — "COV-026" — telling her she was ineligible for the benefit without explaining why.

It took hours of phone calls with the Canada Revenue Agency, she said, before a CRA agent suggested that the fact she collected parental leave benefits might be causing confusion in the CRB process. Pittman said she has now requested a letter from Service Canada clarifying her status.

Pittman said she was also told she might have to wait 21 business days for that letter to arrive. Once she gets it, she'll have to send it on to the CRA — so she has no idea how long the total application process could take.

In the meantime — instead of the $500 per week she could be collecting from the CRB — she has no money coming in. And looking for a job in a pandemic has led her nowhere.

My kids and I are desperate for help, <a href="https://twitter.com/JustinTrudeau?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@JustinTrudeau</a> I haven’t been able to apply for the CRB even though I meet all the requirements, <a href="https://twitter.com/CanRevAgency?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@CanRevAgency</a> can’t give me a reason why. Please help <a href="https://twitter.com/theJagmeetSingh?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@theJagmeetSingh</a> —@HajarPittman

"I'm relying on family and friends and savings that I've put away over the years," she told CBC News.

"I'm just hoping and praying that this will be resolved soon because I don't know how long I can go without collecting any financial support from the government. I was really relying on that for myself and my children."

She's not alone. CBC News has received at least three dozen complaints about access to the benefit.

Tracey Crosson, administrator of the "Canadians on $2000/month CERB support group" on Facebook, said she's seeing dozens of complaints a day from people struggling to access the CRB.

"People are having a real hard time with it. They're getting errors and it shouldn't be that way."

Confusion over EI applications

Crosson said the comments she's seen in the Facebook group suggest many people are experiencing problems because they've applied for Employment Insurance in the past but are no longer eligible.

Changes to the federal government's suite of pandemic benefits made more Canadians eligible for Employment Insurance. Those who are eligible for EI are supposed to use it. Those who aren't are expected to apply for the CRB.

Crosson said Trudeau's claim that no one would be left behind in the transition from the CERB to the CRB rings hollow now.

"Why is it that there are people slipping through the cracks?" she asked.

(Crosson's Facebook group was set up by UBIWorks, a non-profit that advocates for universal basic income.)

The Canada Revenue Agency said in a statement that it is aware some applicants are receiving error codes related to their eligibility.

It said when people apply through CRA's "My Account" online or through the automated phone line, the applications go through a verification process.

"The system checks a variety of data sources to determine eligibility," the statement said. "For example, the CRA can verify if the $5,000 income threshold has been met, or detect the possibility of fraud. Applicants who are deemed ineligible for CRB may still be eligible for EI."

The statement noted that as of end of day Wednesday, 497,100 applications had been approved for the CRB.

The agency did not say how many people had been told they were not eligible for the benefit.

Brace for delays, says Service Canada

To handle what's expected to be an unprecedented number of EI claims and a record number of calls over the coming weeks, Service Canada has almost doubled its complement of specialized call centre agents. It's still warning people to expect long waits.

Mara Del Bianco said she also got a 'COV-026' message telling her she was ineligible for benefits without telling her why. Her problem appears to be similar to Pittman's — involving a past claim for benefits for which she is no longer eligible.

Del Bianco said she also spent hours on hold with the CRA and Service Canada. She described the process as confused; at one point, she said, she was asked to provide documents by fax.

She also asked for a letter clarifying her EI eligibility. Like Pittman, she's still waiting for it.

"[I'm] stressed out. Tired," she said. "Just trying to ... I'm trying to keep things afloat."

For Pittman, it's been especially maddening to witness what she called a lack of communication between Service Canada and the CRA.

More than anything, though, she just wants her situation resolved quickly.

"I'm left behind. I'm not getting any financial support right now."York Region will join Toronto, Peel and Ottawa in moving into a modified version Stage 2 as it deals with a surge in new COVID-19 cases, Premier Doug Ford said Friday.

The change will take effect at 12:01 a.m. Monday and stay in place for at least 28 days, he said at his daily news conference.

That means that gyms, indoor dining rooms and movie theatres will be closed in the region, which includes Markham, Vaughan and Richmond Hill. But schools, child care centres and places of worship will remain open and must continue following the public health measures in place.

On Thursday, Ford said York Region has been "teetering for a while," and that the province is keeping a close eye on the region, calling its numbers "concerning."

But he said the decision was a difficult one to make, given the potential consequences for local businesses.

"I hate doing this," he said. "We just have to stop the spread."

WATCH | Premier Doug Ford explains his decision to move York Region into a modified Stage 2:

York Region moves to modified Stage 2 COVID-19 restrictions 1:44 On Friday, Premier Doug Ford announced that York Region will join Toronto, Peel and Ottawa in moving into a modified version Stage 2 as it deals with a surge in new COVID-19 cases. The change will take effect at 12:01 a.m. on Oct. 19 and stay in place for at least 28 days. 1:44

From Oct. 3 to Oct. 9, York Region's case rate increased by 49 per cent to 38.7 per 100,000 people, which is above the Ontario average, according to the province.

In addition, the number of COVID-19 hospitalizations in the region has doubled over the past week.

The region also saw an increase in its testing positivity rate to 2.77 per cent, which is above the "high alert" threshold of 2.5 per cent.

Meanwhile, Ontario reported another 712 cases of COVID-19 on Friday as the number of people in Ontario hospitals with confirmed cases of the illness continued its slow but steady climb.

Trends in the 'wrong direction'

Health Minister Christine Elliott said that the current trends in the area are "concerning" and that they "required us to take action."

"The trends we've seen in York Region are in the wrong direction," Elliott said. "Numbers have jumped and we need to do everything we can to avoid a very severe second wave."

York Region's chairman and CEO, Wayne Emmerson, and its Medical Officer of Health Dr. Karim Kurji issued a joint statement urging residents to abide by the new rules.

"While this is not the news any of us wanted to hear, it is a grim reminder the virus is still a threat to the 1.2 million people who call York Region home," the pair said in the statement.

"It also serves as a signal we all must continue taking steps to keep each other, our families and our communities safe.

WATCH | Health Minister Christine Elliott on the concerning COVID-19 trends in York Region:

'Concerning trends' in York Region, says Ontario health minister 3:46 York Region moving to modified Stage 2 of COVID-19 restrictions was a decision made after seeing concerning trends and looking at multiple indicators, including community transmission, says Ontario Health Minister Christine Elliott. 3:46

Both the premier and health minister also issued a plea to those living in Halton Region, which has also seen recent increases in new daily cases, to keep following public health guidelines to prevent similar action there.

The daily number of infections remained above the 700 mark all this week, with 807 cases on Monday, 746 on Tuesday, and 721 on Wednesday.

The largest number in today's update — 213 cases — was reported in Toronto, followed by Peel with 135 cases, Ottawa with 108 cases and York Region with 62.

After steadily increasing for more than a week, the seven-day average of new daily cases dropped for a second straight day, and it now sits at about 746.

Ontario confirmed nine new deaths linked to COVID-19 on Friday, taking the province's death toll to 3,031.

The province's labs processed 38,500 tests.

There are 713 more resolved cases taking the provincial total to 54,004 recovered patients.

Meanwhile, there are 261 people hospitalized as a result of COVID-19. Of this number 67 people are in intensive care units across the province, 36 of them on a ventilator.

Meanwhile, as of today, residents of long-term care homes in three regions where cases have been surging are not allowed to go out for social or personal reasons.

The new restrictions will apply to long-term care homes in Toronto, Peel Region and Ottawa, and will remain in place until further notice.

Federal contact tracers ready to help

On Friday, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said federal contact tracers are ready to help chase down people who might have been exposed to COVID-19.

He says they can make up to 14,000 calls a day, at the request of the provinces and territories.

Quickly following up with people who have been close to someone who tests positive for the illness is seen as essential to containing its spread.

Some jurisdictions, including Toronto, have limited the number of people they will try to reach as new cases have cropped up faster than contact tracers can work.

Province supports production of PPEs

On Friday the province announced it continues to work with businesses and the manufacturing sector to expand production of domestic PPE to ensure preparedness, both now and for the future.

To support the fight against COVID-19, Greenfield Global is investing a total of $75 million at their facility in Johnstown Ontario to produce the medical-grade alcohol critical to making hand sanitizers used by Ontario individuals, families, and front-line workers.

The Ontario government is investing $2.5 million through the Ontario Together Fund in support of this project.

The announcement was made today by MPP Steve Clark and Minister of Municipal Affairs and Housing on behalf of Vic Fedeli, Minister of Economic Development, Job Creation and Trade.

"By working together with these innovative businesses, we are ensuring we are well-prepared for the future as we continue our fight against COVID-19," Fedeli said.