OTTAWA–The Bank of Canada is pushing back against Conservative questions about its independence from the federal government, saying its inflation target — not politics — is guiding its response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

The central bank was pulled into the pandemic political fray Thursday when Conservative finance critic Pierre Poilievre suggested the bank was enabling the Liberal government’s deficit-spending habits.

In an interview with Bloomberg News, Poilievre warned the central bank to avoid acting as an “ATM” for Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s emergency pandemic programs.

At issue is the bank’s unprecedented purchase of billions of dollars worth of government bonds in an effort to stabilize the economy, which has been rocked by rolling lockdowns during the COVID-19 crisis. The bank has committed to buying $5 billion in government bonds each week during the crisis, a policy known as “quantitative easing” which is intended to inject cash into the economy.

Poilievre called the practice — which has been employed on a massive scale by central banks around the world during the crisis, including in the U.S., U.K., and Australia — “printing money,” and suggested it was a “pyramid scheme.”

“Expanding the bank’s balance sheet during a short-term, once-in-a-lifetime pandemic lockdown is different than perpetually buying and inflating the financial assets of the wealthy at everyone else’s expense,” Poilievre said in a written statement to the Star.

“Trickle-down economics does not work. We need a bottom-up, worker-led recovery.”

The bank has said it will stop its quantitative easing efforts once the economy has recovered after COVID-19.

Poilievre’s characterization was challenged by independent economic analysts who spoke to the Star on Thursday.

“Every central bank is probing the outer limits of monetary intervention to an extent we’ve never seen before, but the Bank of Canada is hardly alone in this intervention,” said David Rosenberg, the chief economist at Rosenberg Research. “I mean, look what’s happened in the world around us.”

Rosenberg pointed out that the bank’s counterpart, the U.S. Federal Reserve, is openly calling on Washington for more fiscal stimulus to weather COVID-19’s economic storm.

“Is Canada behaving irresponsibly? I don’t see that,” Rosenberg said. “Is (Bank of Canada governor) Tiff Macklem somehow political? I find that really hard to believe,”

The Bank of Canada is not typically drawn in to the cut and thrust of partisan politics. As a Crown corporation, it operates at arm’s-length from the government and has legislated independence to set the country’s monetary policy with an eye to keeping inflation low.

While the bank’s efforts to stabilize the Canadian economy during COVID-19 are unprecedented, they should not be viewed as political said Scotiabank chief economist Jean-François Perrault.

“There is no question that central banks around the world … have needed to undertake absolutely exceptional measures to try and stabilize economies and put them on a path to recovery,” said Perrault, who previously worked at the central bank and in government.

“The bank is obviously an inflation targeting organization. That’s job number one, that’s its mandate. I’m 100 per cent convinced beyond a shadow of a doubt that the actions that they’ve taken were all done with the objective of stabilizing inflation.”

In a statement, the Bank of Canada said it has been “consistently clear that the policy actions taken by the bank during the COVID-19 pandemic are always guided by our mandated inflation objective.”

Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading...

Alex Paterson, a spokesperson for the central bank, also pointed to a previous statement that the bank intends to continue its policy of quantitative easing until the recovery from COVID-19 is “well underway.”

The Liberal government was less guarded in its response to Poilievre’s charges.

“The Conservatives are recklessly politicizing the role of the independent, and widely respected Bank of Canada,” wrote Katherine Cuplinskas, a spokesperson for Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Chrystia Freeland. A tentative deal reached between Unifor and Fiat Chrysler will bring 2,000 jobs to the Windsor plant along with electric vehicle capability in the next few years.

The agreement was struck a few minutes before midnight Wednesday, avoiding a possible strike from autoworkers.

At a press conference this morning, Union President Jerry Dias explained that Unifor managed to secure about a $1.5 billion dollar investment into the Windsor assembly plant, with the majority of the money coming from Fiat Chrysler.

"This is a homerun for the community of Windsor," said Dias.

Third shift will return

In addition to keeping the existing product portfolio in Ontario, Dias says FCA has committed to adding three product derivatives to its plants.

"Those products will lead to the recall of over 100 members at the Etobicoke casting plant," said Dias.

Earlier this year, the Windsor plant lost its third shift causing 1,500 workers to be laid off. Today, Dias said the new jobs added will include calling back 425 workers and adding more than 1,500 new jobs to the Windsor region.

"With this investment and as vehicles start to roll off the assembly line in 2024, our third shift will be back and we expect that the total jobs will rise to over 2,000 more in the community in Windsor," said Dias.

The new platform in Windsor will launch in 2024 and will be able to build plug in hybrid vehicles and/or battery electric vehicles said Dias.

"The work in Windsor will start in 2023," said Dias. "We'll start mass manufacturing in 2024."

Unifor represents 9,000 Canadian autoworkers at FCA.

FCA confirmed a tentative agreement was reached with Unifor on a new contract, but wouldn't divulge any details at this point.

Ratification for the deal with FCA is on Sunday. Union members will be voting online.

Last night's tentative agreement follows an earlier deal made with Ford last month.

Up next, Unifor will begin negotiations with GM next week.A tentative deal reached between Unifor and Fiat Chrysler will bring 2,000 jobs to the Windsor plant along with electric vehicle capability in the next few years.

The agreement was struck a few minutes before midnight Wednesday, avoiding a possible strike from autoworkers.

At a press conference this morning, Union President Jerry Dias explained that Unifor managed to secure about a $1.5 billion dollar investment into the Windsor assembly plant, with the majority of the money coming from Fiat Chrysler.

"This is a homerun for the community of Windsor," said Dias.

Third shift will return

In addition to keeping the existing product portfolio in Ontario, Dias says FCA has committed to adding three product derivatives to its plants.

"Those products will lead to the recall of over 100 members at the Etobicoke casting plant," said Dias.

Earlier this year, the Windsor plant lost its third shift causing 1,500 workers to be laid off. Today, Dias said the new jobs added will include calling back 425 workers and adding more than 1,500 new jobs to the Windsor region.

"With this investment and as vehicles start to roll off the assembly line in 2024, our third shift will be back and we expect that the total jobs will rise to over 2,000 more in the community in Windsor," said Dias.

The new platform in Windsor will launch in 2024 and will be able to build plug in hybrid vehicles and/or battery electric vehicles said Dias.

"The work in Windsor will start in 2023," said Dias. "We'll start mass manufacturing in 2024."

Unifor represents 9,000 Canadian autoworkers at FCA.

FCA confirmed a tentative agreement was reached with Unifor on a new contract, but wouldn't divulge any details at this point.

Ratification for the deal with FCA is on Sunday. Union members will be voting online.

Last night's tentative agreement follows an earlier deal made with Ford last month.

Up next, Unifor will begin negotiations with GM next week.LISTEN TO ARTICLE 4:33 SHARE THIS ARTICLE Share Tweet Post Email

Photographer: Della Rollins/Bloomberg Photographer: Della Rollins/Bloomberg

Waterloo Brewing Ltd. has spent eight years and C$85million ($64 million) expanding its facilities, all so it can make booze for someone else.

The Ontario-based company, which got its start making craft lagers 40 years ago, wants to be the go-to producer for global brands selling everything from hard seltzers to canned cocktails in Canada. In the next two years it plans to more than double the volume of beverages it’s producing for other brands -- known in the industry as co-packing -- to 650,000 hectoliters from around 300,000 hectoliters this year.

Its craft brew business is still growing -- Waterloo’s namesake brands posted volume growth of 25% in its most recent quarter -- but even those gains can’t keep pace with the demand the company is seeing from global conglomerates, like Pernod Ricard SA and Carlsberg AS. Seeking to expand the reach of the beverage brands they’ve snapped up in recent years, these ever-growing giants are also looking for ways to trim costs.

At the other end of the scale, Waterloo is getting an additional boost from new hard seltzer companies and other beverage startups, keen to focus on marketing and leave production to someone else.

“Our owned brand volumes continue to grow, but the exponential growth is in our co-pack business,” Chief Executive Officer George Croft said in an interview.

So far, the strategy is winning approval from investors. Waterloo rose 1.6% to C$4.95 at 11:44 a.m. in Toronto, on track for a record high close. The shares have surged more than 40% this year, compared with a 3.4% drop for the S&P/Toronto Composite Index.



It’s a major transformation for a company that barely had a toehold in the co-packing business when Croft came aboard 12 years ago. (His previous employer, Canada’s storied Labatt Brewing, is now owned by much larger Belgian beverage giant Anheuser-Busch InBev SA.)

Founded in 1984, Waterloo Brewing claims to be the first craft brewery in Ontario. Originally called Brick Brewing, after founder Jim Brickman, it was renamed last year in homage to the Ontario region where it’s based.

Waterloo produces a stable of traditional craft-beer styles, including a golden lager, an India pale ale, as well as dark and amber lagers that for close to forty years have been the choice of customers who wanted bolder flavors than those provided by mass-produced brews.

George Croft Source: Waterloo Brewing Ltd.

Since Croft came aboard, it has expanded beyond beer with the purchase of the Canadian rights to Seagram coolers, as well as the LandShark and Margaritaville brands. It also has co-packing deals to manufacture Absolut Vodka’s canned cocktails, Somersby ciders and Mott’s Clamato beverages, along with nine other undisclosed brands, in Canada.

While it’s difficult to find hard figures, co-packing has become increasingly common for large beverage companies that want to quickly capitalize on hot new drinks trends and keep their costs low, said Kenneth Shea, an analyst at Bloomberg Intelligence.

“Co-packing is a vibrant activity involving most of the large beverage companies -- as packer or customer-- exacerbated by the rush into the fast-growing hard seltzer business,” Shea said.

Waterloo’s further expansion plans for the next two years will almost double Waterloo’s annual production to 1.2 million hectoliters in fiscal 2023. By then, co-packing will represent about 54% of the company’s volume, from 46% currently.

Pallets of beverages at Waterloo’s warehouse. Photographer: Della Rollins/Bloomberg

Current contracts are locked in so barring a sharp decline in alcohol consumption in Canada, or specifically beer, which still accounts for about 55% of total volume, Croft sees few risks ahead. The brewer-for-hire model mitigates the risk of consumer tastes changing and allows it to benefit from new trends while leaving the marketing to their clients.

“People that are getting into the seltzer business are saying, ‘Geez, I know how to build brands, I understand the route to market, but why would I build a facility, why would I take on that complexity?’” Croft said.

There’s also scope to diversify through acquisitions, once the expansion is complete and capital spending drops back to C$4 million to C$5 million a year, Croft said. He expects to be on the hunt in the next 12 to 24 months; the ideal candidate would be a branded business with excess manufacturing capacity and the ability to expand production from around 250,000 hectoliters to as much as 500,000 hectoliters, Croft said.

He’d also like to add geographic diversity by targeting companies in the western provinces of Alberta and British Columbia.

“We don’t want to have all our eggs in one basket,” Croft said. “So if we do get a red light in one piece of our business, it’s not a paralyzing issue.”

— With assistance by Divya Balji