With less than 10 days to the provincial election, Chilliwack-Kent candidate Laurie Throness has stepped down from the B.C. Liberal Party after comparing free contraception to eugenics.

B.C. Liberal Leader Andrew Wilkinson announced Throness was out during a campaign stop in Coquitlam, saying the opinions of the two-time MLA were not in keeping with party values.

"I've accepted his resignation ... we'll move forward without him," said Wilkinson. "It's critical that we all understand that access to contraception is a critical issue in our society."

Throness was elected in 2013 and again in 2017 but will now run as an independent, although with the Oct. 24 provincial election looming, the Liberal affiliation will still appear on the ballot beside his name.

B.C. Liberals accept candidate Laurie Throness's resignation 0:53 Leader Andrew Wilkinson says the views of the former Chilliwack-Kent MLA around contraception do not align with the party, and that he accepts his resignation. 0:53

According to Elections BC, write-in or mail-in ballots that have already been submitted with votes for the B.C. Liberal party or Throness in Chilliwack-Kent will count for Throness because the deadline to withdraw a party affiliation has already passed.

Updated numbers from Elections BC show that 7,385 mail-in voting packages have been issued in the riding.

Throness made his controversial comments Wednesday evening during an all-candidates forum. Both the NDP and Greens are campaigning on the promise of making prescription contraception more accessible.

"It contains a whiff of the old eugenics thing where, you know, poor people shouldn't have babies," he said.

"And so, we can't force them to have contraception, so we'll give it to them for free. And maybe they'll have fewer babies so there will be fewer poor people in the future. And to me, that contains an odour that I don't like."

The chair of Access B.C., a group campaigning for free prescription contraception, said Throness's comments were misogynistic and show how out of touch he is.

"I think the only way we can possibly even talk about [eugenics] is to jump in a time machine," said Teale Phelps Bondaroff.

Birth control pills, the ring, IUDs and the patch are all methods of contraception. The B.C. NDP and B.C. Green Party both say they will increase access to free prescription contraception if elected. (AccessBC)

"When you oppose actions that try and increase access to [contraception], especially in the way Mr. Throness did, you're basically saying women don't have the ability to make choices about things that happen to their body, and that's unacceptable."

Phelps Bondaroff said Access B.C. met with Throness in August of 2019 to discuss how increasing access to contraception leads to improvements in women's health and equality and saves governments money.

Laurie Throness’ comments on contraception are reprehensible. <br><br>The evidence is clear that improving access to contraception actually helps address inequality.<a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/bcelxn2020?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#bcelxn2020</a> —@SoniaFurstenau

Throness's comments were widely criticized on social media by members of all parties. On Twitter, B.C. Green Party leader Sonia Furstenau called what he said "reprehensible."

"The evidence is clear that improving access to contraception actually helps address inequality," she tweeted.

Eugenics is the practice of selective breeding in humans aimed at increasing so-called desirable characteristics while decreasing so-called undesirable traits.

Throness has been criticized in the past for alleged homophobia and for defending an article touting the widely discredited practice of conversion therapy. TORONTO -- An investigative technique widely used in the United States but still new to Canada helped police solve the murder of Christine Jessop, a nine-year-old girl who was abducted, sexually assaulted and murdered 36 years ago.

Toronto police had a key piece of evidence -- a semen sample on Jessop’s underwear -- but until recently they didn’t have a DNA match. So they turned to the science of genetic genealogy, which combines DNA analysis and family tree research.

Genetic genealogy uses existing DNA data to provide a possible family tree from a human sample. Rather than one suspect, the approach digs up a broad family lineage, from parents and siblings to distant cousins. It’s then up to investigators to use classic investigative tools, such as combing through historical records, obituaries, social media or other channels to winnow their search.

In this case, Toronto police sent the DNA sample down to a laboratory in the United States, because there are currently no Canadian labs that specialize in genetic genealogy.

Staff Supt. Peter Code noted that, while the findings from the genetic genealogy test were not considered evidence, they helped investigators create two potential family trees.

“After extensively combing through detailed reports and documents, the second family tree produced Calvin Hoover,” Code said at a press conference on Thursday.

Hoover was 28 when he killed Jessop, police said, adding that he and his wife had a “neighbour acquaintance” relationship at the time of Jessop's death and that he may have worked with her father.

Hoover died five years ago.

Genetic genealogy is not widely used in Canada, but this case could change that, according to Sean Sparling, a former police chief in Sault Ste. Marie, Ont., and president of the Investigative Solutions Network.

“This is going to be a new emerging technology for Canadian law enforcement. You’re going to see a lot of cold case units where they have unsolved homicides, unsolved serial rapist cases, they’re going to be turning to this technology,” Sparling told CTV News Channel on Thursday.

In the United States, genetic genealogy has already helped crack several decades-old cold cases. Last year, forensic genealogists tracked down the identity of a woman killed near a Lake Tahoe hiking trail in 1982 and the identity of her killer.

In California, a man who was falsely accused of murdering a newspaper columnist and spent 14 years in prison was exonerated thanks to the technology. His case marked the second time in the U.S. that genetic genealogy helped prove someone innocent.

The work to finally track down Jessop’s killer involved “excellent police work,” said CTV News Public Safety Analyst Chris Lewis. But he said there are some lingering questions about how Toronto police accessed DNA information that led them to Hoover.

“The police just don’t have the DNA profiles of family members of suspects in their labs. Unless those people were charged with an offence that would require them to give a DNA sample, so somehow or another they’ve linked it through family members’ DNA, which may well have come from some private company like ancestry.com," he said.

The particulars of the case may never be fully known, Lewis said, because the case won’t head to trial.

“So there will never be a matter of it being tried and true and proven in court under that scrutiny. But it was enough for them to be able to close the file and give closure to the Jessop family,” he said.

With files from CTV Toronto’s Sean DavidsonTORONTO -- An investigative technique widely used in the United States but still new to Canada helped police solve the murder of Christine Jessop, a nine-year-old girl who was abducted, sexually assaulted and murdered 36 years ago.

Toronto police had a key piece of evidence -- a semen sample on Jessop’s underwear -- but until recently they didn’t have a DNA match. So they turned to the science of genetic genealogy, which combines DNA analysis and family tree research.

Genetic genealogy uses existing DNA data to provide a possible family tree from a human sample. Rather than one suspect, the approach digs up a broad family lineage, from parents and siblings to distant cousins. It’s then up to investigators to use classic investigative tools, such as combing through historical records, obituaries, social media or other channels to winnow their search.

In this case, Toronto police sent the DNA sample down to a laboratory in the United States, because there are currently no Canadian labs that specialize in genetic genealogy.

Staff Supt. Peter Code noted that, while the findings from the genetic genealogy test were not considered evidence, they helped investigators create two potential family trees.

“After extensively combing through detailed reports and documents, the second family tree produced Calvin Hoover,” Code said at a press conference on Thursday.

Hoover was 28 when he killed Jessop, police said, adding that he and his wife had a “neighbour acquaintance” relationship at the time of Jessop's death and that he may have worked with her father.

Hoover died five years ago.

Genetic genealogy is not widely used in Canada, but this case could change that, according to Sean Sparling, a former police chief in Sault Ste. Marie, Ont., and president of the Investigative Solutions Network.

“This is going to be a new emerging technology for Canadian law enforcement. You’re going to see a lot of cold case units where they have unsolved homicides, unsolved serial rapist cases, they’re going to be turning to this technology,” Sparling told CTV News Channel on Thursday.

In the United States, genetic genealogy has already helped crack several decades-old cold cases. Last year, forensic genealogists tracked down the identity of a woman killed near a Lake Tahoe hiking trail in 1982 and the identity of her killer.

In California, a man who was falsely accused of murdering a newspaper columnist and spent 14 years in prison was exonerated thanks to the technology. His case marked the second time in the U.S. that genetic genealogy helped prove someone innocent.

The work to finally track down Jessop’s killer involved “excellent police work,” said CTV News Public Safety Analyst Chris Lewis. But he said there are some lingering questions about how Toronto police accessed DNA information that led them to Hoover.

“The police just don’t have the DNA profiles of family members of suspects in their labs. Unless those people were charged with an offence that would require them to give a DNA sample, so somehow or another they’ve linked it through family members’ DNA, which may well have come from some private company like ancestry.com," he said.

The particulars of the case may never be fully known, Lewis said, because the case won’t head to trial.

“So there will never be a matter of it being tried and true and proven in court under that scrutiny. But it was enough for them to be able to close the file and give closure to the Jessop family,” he said.

With files from CTV Toronto’s Sean DavidsonA recent COVID-19 outbreak at a southern Ontario fitness studio is illustrating how certain indoor settings can provide a perfect storm for superspreading events.

The studio, a downtown Hamilton Spinco location, has been connected to 69 cases of COVID-19 as of Wednesday, despite screening customers, operating at 50 per cent capacity and keeping the recommended two-metre radius around bikes.

So how did so many cases originate there? And does it raise concern about how the novel coronavirus can spread in a gym setting?

"Certainly, this event makes you wonder that," said Dr. Matthew Oughton, an infectious disease expert at Jewish General Hospital and McGill University in Montreal.

"I can see where this could lead to perhaps gyms having serious restrictions placed on them if they want to avoid similar superspreading events."

Ontario and Quebec recently reintroduced closures at gyms in virus hot spots, including Toronto, Montreal and Ottawa, for a four-week period to help limit spread.

And Dr. Barbara Yaffe, Ontario's associate chief medical officer, said Wednesday authorities are reviewing guidelines for fitness studios across the province after the Hamilton outbreak.

Oughton said gyms and fitness studios have a few strikes against them when it comes to tailoring them for the pandemic.

Heavier breathing expels droplets farther

They're operating almost exclusively indoors, which makes for poorer ventilation, and patrons aren't usually masked when engaging in strenuous exercise.

High-impact activity also leads to heavier breathing, which means droplets are being expelled from peoples' mouths at an accelerated rate — and being propelled farther distances.

An employee at a Gatineau, Que., gym wipes down equipment in late June during the pandemic. When people are exercising vigorously, the volume and distance of what comes out of their mouth and their lungs differs than when they speak normally. (Frédéric Pepin/Radio-Canada)

Dr. Andrew Morris, a professor of medicine at the University of Toronto, likens it to throwing a ball. The harder you throw, the farther it goes.

"We still don't have a perfect understanding of this," he said. "But we do know that when people are exercising vigorously, the volume and distance of what comes out of their mouth and their lungs is dramatically different than when somebody is speaking [in a normal way]."

WATCH | Dr. Theresa Tam, Canada's top doctor, on aerosol transmission:

COVID-19 transmission by aerosol or droplets? 1:00 Chief Public Health Officer Dr. Theresa Tam admits that guidance regarding the transmission of COVID-19 may have to change. 1:00

If people are shouting, cheering or singing — which often happens in a spin class where music is blaring and instructors spew out encouragement to keep participants' intensity up — that can make things worse.

"And if you mix that in with a space that may not have proper ventilation, there is risk for a lot of spread to occur," Morris said.

Dr. Ilan Schwartz, an infectious disease expert with the University of Alberta, said spin classes may pose more risk than other group settings because of the bikes themselves. In theory, the rapidly spinning wheels could aerosolize droplets by flinging them farther distances.

"I haven't seen any studies of this, but theoretically it makes sense," he said.

"I think going to the gym isn't necessarily high-risk, unless individuals are close together and there's poor ventilation. But there might be specific circumstances that could make it higher-risk, where something with fast, moving parts [or] a rapidly moving fan can generate aerosols as well."

Holland Philpott participates in an outdoor yoga class in a dome to facilitate distancing and proper protocols to prevent the spread of COVID-19, in Toronto in June. (Carlos Osorio/Reuters)

But Morris said the real danger comes when people are spewing out droplets in a poorly ventilated space.

Fitness class dangers not equal

The prolonged length of time spent in a spin class, typically one hour, and the number of people in the room will also impact risk.

Not all fitness classes will present the same dangers, he added.

A low-impact yoga class where hearts aren't racing and breathing is kept under control seems safer than a high-impact spin class but not if it's crowded and poorly ventilated.

A dance class, where participants are crisscrossing into airspace previously occupied by others, can be risky as well in the same environment.

A lone jogger, wearing a protective face mask, runs with her dog in the Tuileries Garden in Paris as a lockdown is imposed in March. Masks, while uncomfortable when working out, can be worn. (Charles Platiau/Reuters)

"Assuming that room has relatively poor ventilation, that's the kind of setting where yes, you'd be concerned about the potential for transmission," Oughton said. "But if you had the exact same room with an excellent HVAC system, or the same room where windows were kept open … those are the kinds of things you could do to reduce the risk."

Morris said finding ways to make these activities safer is always better than banning them.

Masks, while uncomfortable when working out, can be worn in most instances, he said. Improving ventilation and limiting numbers of people even further can also help.

"If we're going to be successful, we can't keep telling people they can't have these things," Morris said. "We need to be able to point to something and say, 'This is the better choice."'

Schwartz said frequent hand-cleaning and the sanitization of equipment should also be kept in mind, even if surface transmission isn't as concerning as it was earlier in the pandemic.

"And for now, I think it's probably a good idea to avoid spin classes," he added.

Oughton foresees people taking their workouts outdoors in new ways over the winter if gyms and fitness centres are deemed too risky.

That could mean dusting off the skates or ski boots.

"I think this is going to re-emphasize the safety and the necessity of being able to get some activity and fresh air outside," he said.

"Hopefully, we find new appreciation for outdoor winter sports that we can all enjoy."