Latest

Weather

Seasonal

Space

Lifestyle

Climate

Severe

Animals

Health First all-Canadian electric vehicle will be built in Windsor, Ontario Wednesday, October 14th 2020, 5:44 pm - The Project Arrow virtual design is expected to be unveiled in early 2021

Virtual reality technology in Windsor will be used to help develop the first all-Canadian, electric vehicle with hopes that it will drive the future of the auto sector.

Project Arrow, spearheaded by the Automotive Parts Manufacturers' Association (APMA) of Canada, will be the first original, all-Canadian, zero-emission vehicle in the country, according to a news release Tuesday from the organization. The WindsorEssex Economic Development Corporation's virtual reality CAVE will help engineer the virtual model, while Ontario Tech University in Oshawa builds a physical one.

The vehicle shown is the design submitted by a team at Carleton University. The team will build the vehicle using virtual reality technology in Windsor-Essex. (Submitted by APMA)

The CAVE is an immersive virtual reality studio for enhanced simulations.

"This project will bring together the best of the best of Canada's electric-drive, alternative-fuel, connected and autonomous and light-weight technology companies," reads the news release.

On Tuesday, APMA announced that the finalist for the vehicle design is a team from Carleton University's School of Industrial Design in Ottawa. The team beat out 25 other applicants across Canada.

Now that a design has been selected, Project Arrow will move into the engineering phase.

The CAVE will be used by experts in Canada's automotive supply sector and post-secondary institutions to perform real-time testing and ensure safety standards are met.

"The [virtual reality] CAVE is a tremendous asset for our community and partnerships like this put a flag in the ground that Windsor-Essex is the automobility hub in Canada," Stephen MacKenzie, president of the Windsor-Essex Economic Development Corporation, said in a news release.

A look at the interior design of Project Arrow. (Submitted by APMA)

In addition to this, locals have said the vehicle's parts could all come from Canada, with APMA president Flavio Volpe stating that roughly one-third of Project Arrow's parts could be sourced directly from Windsor.

"Windsor is the beating heart of the Canadian auto sector, I can think of no other better place to take the first pulse of the Arrow," Volpe stated in the release.

Volpe told CBC News that the project allows Windsor to have a hand in the government's call to action to have a zero emissions economy by 2050.

"If this inspires somebody to launch a Canadian [original equipment manufacturer] or if this becomes a Canadian [original equipment manufacturer], I think everybody wins, including all of the people in the Windsor region who are disproportionately invested in this industry," Volpe said. "If it sounds like a moon shot it's because that's where we aimed it."

The virtual vehicle is expected to be unveiled in the beginning of 2021, Volpe said, adding that the physical model should be ready for 2022.

This article was originally published by CBC News. Article content

Nicola Moore recently released her first song, “The Arrow.” A singer-songwriter, peer advocate at the Hamilton Community Food Centre, and single mother of three children under nine, she’s made the most of any pandemic-induced “lulls” in her life by writing music.

“I could sit here and get Ontario Works payments or I could do something about it and change my life, which is what I’m trying to do right now,” says Moore. “Advocacy and singing are my way out.“

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or One in seven Canadians is experiencing food insecurity during COVID-19, and its toll is heavier than hunger: report Back to video

A first-time gardener on a community plot, Moore is ecstatic when describing her harvest: cucumbers, green beans, lettuce, squash, tomatoes, a variety of herbs and an abundance of kale. She’s also in the midst of a project at work, illustrating how to spin a can of chickpeas a multitude of ways so others — like herself — can transform the canned items they get on monthly trips to the food bank.

“Because I am them,” says Moore. “They are me.”

Photo by Hamilton Community Food Centre

Prior to the pandemic, according to a report released by the non-profit Community Food Centres Canada (CFCC), an estimated 4.5 million Canadians experienced food insecurity. During COVID-19, that number has increased by 39 per cent; disproportionately affecting Black, Indigenous and northern communities. As a result of the strains of the pandemic, one in seven people — including Moore — is food insecure; unable to afford enough food, or worried about running out without the means to buy more.Article content

Nicola Moore recently released her first song, “The Arrow.” A singer-songwriter, peer advocate at the Hamilton Community Food Centre, and single mother of three children under nine, she’s made the most of any pandemic-induced “lulls” in her life by writing music.

“I could sit here and get Ontario Works payments or I could do something about it and change my life, which is what I’m trying to do right now,” says Moore. “Advocacy and singing are my way out.“

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or One in seven Canadians is experiencing food insecurity during COVID-19, and its toll is heavier than hunger: report Back to video

A first-time gardener on a community plot, Moore is ecstatic when describing her harvest: cucumbers, green beans, lettuce, squash, tomatoes, a variety of herbs and an abundance of kale. She’s also in the midst of a project at work, illustrating how to spin a can of chickpeas a multitude of ways so others — like herself — can transform the canned items they get on monthly trips to the food bank.

“Because I am them,” says Moore. “They are me.”

Photo by Hamilton Community Food Centre

Prior to the pandemic, according to a report released by the non-profit Community Food Centres Canada (CFCC), an estimated 4.5 million Canadians experienced food insecurity. During COVID-19, that number has increased by 39 per cent; disproportionately affecting Black, Indigenous and northern communities. As a result of the strains of the pandemic, one in seven people — including Moore — is food insecure; unable to afford enough food, or worried about running out without the means to buy more.