Open this photo in gallery Paul Taylor owns and operates Brickhouse Gym in Winnipeg. Shannon VanRaes/The Globe and Mail

Paul Taylor offers words of encouragement through a black mask at Winnipeg’s Brickhouse Gym, a large, industrial-looking space, sprinkled with equally masked clients clutching bottles of disinfectant as they move from one workout station to the next.

“Stay low, keep going, you got it!” shouts the gym owner, pausing only to glance at the dark clouds gathering outside. If the skies clear, he’ll lead an outdoor boot camp later in the day – one of the few fitness classes he can offer under current COVID-19 restrictions.

But with coronavirus cases soaring in Winnipeg, testing capacity strained and Manitoba’s infamous winter approaching, even tighter restrictions aren’t off the table.

Story continues below advertisement

“The idea of another lockdown sounds horrific to me,” said Mr. Taylor. “I really don’t know what we’d do.”

How many coronavirus cases are there in Canada, by province, and worldwide? The latest maps and charts

Manitoba’s upward COVID-19 trajectory is now one of Canada’s steepest, fuelled by cases in the province’s capital. With an average 4.4 per cent of virus tests in Winnipeg coming back positive, double the national average and a warning sign of spread, Manitoba Chief Public Health Officer Brent Roussin said he is running out of “targeted interventions” to slow transmission of the disease.

Coronavirus made a late arrival in Manitoba. In July, the province went nearly two weeks without recording a single positive test result. At one point that month, there was just one active case in the entire province. Now, new records are being set nearly every day. Winnipeg reported 114 new cases on Wednesday alone.

As for what’s caused the dramatic uptick, Dr. Roussin pointed the finger at “prolonged, close contact” between individuals from different households, but he remained vague about where this contact is occurring. Last week, the province moved last call in Winnipeg to 10 p.m., and city bars and restaurants must now close by 11 p.m.

The week prior, the province made masks mandatory in Winnipeg indoor settings for the first time since the pandemic began, as the city moved into the “orange,” or restricted, level of the province’s pandemic response system.

Manitoba’s top doctor said the province’s ability to contact trace has also been “strained” in recent days by complex cases, some involving individuals who visited “multiple venues” while symptomatic. A COVID-19 outbreak has also been declared at Headingley Correctional Centre, just west of Winnipeg, where 150 people are in self-isolation after seven inmates and two staff members tested positive.

Infections are on the rise at local long-term care homes as well, including Parkview Place in downtown Winnipeg, which has reported seven deaths and 74 cases of COVID-19. To date, 37 Manitobans have died as a result of the novel coronavirus and its resulting COVID-19.

Story continues below advertisement

As case numbers grow, so too does frustration with testing capacity.

Manitoba Premier Brian Pallister said this month he was “not satisfied” with testing capacity in the province and announced six more testing sites, including two in Winnipeg.

Bob Moroz, president of the Manitoba Association of Health Care Professionals, said “more testing sites are great, but they don’t do much good if the [lab] capacity isn’t there to handle the increased number of tests coming in.”

It took two days for Lucy Pavez and her elderly mother to get tested at a newly opened walk-up site in Winnipeg’s West End. After being turned away, they returned the next day hours before the site opened, just to get a number for a different queue.

“Thank God I had a car – it was raining,” she said. “But to get tested in the winter, without a car, it would be terrible.”

Damon Johnson is a board member with Circle of Life Thunderbird House, which offered Indigenous programming prior to the pandemic. Today it’s a walk-up COVID-19 test site.

Story continues below advertisement

Mr. Johnson said lines at the test site seem shorter this week than last, but he doesn’t know if it’s because of faster turnarounds, more test sites or fewer people seeking testing. “What we’ve been talking about today is actually winter and how that will work,” he said.

The province announced it will move to an appointment-based testing system in the coming weeks, but few details have been provided. Dr. Roussin said he hopes the new system, once implemented, will shorten wait times, preventing long lines at walk-up test sites during Winnipeg’s notoriously cold winter weather.

NDP health critic Uzoma Asagwara doesn’t understand why cold weather testing wasn’t addressed weeks, if not months, ago. “Being October, we could see snow, we know this in Manitoba, at any point, we could see temperatures drop dramatically any time and to not have a clearly outlined strategy in place by this point is unacceptable,” they said.

Ms. Pavez would like to see large, underused buildings such as the RBC Convention Centre Winnipeg considered for indoor COVID-19 test sites.

Meanwhile, Winnipeg’s bar and restaurant owners are preparing for the change of seasons. For the first time, the city is allowing their outdoor patios to remain open year-round. Outdoor heaters are now sold out at most stores across the city.

At Brickhouse Gym, Mr. Taylor is still hopeful that a further lockdown can be avoided and noted there are limits to what his business and others can accomplish by looking to the outdoors.

Story continues below advertisement

“With Winnipeg winters you get to a certain point where you can bundle up as much as you want," he said, "but if you stand outside long enough, you will die.”

Our Morning Update and Evening Update newsletters are written by Globe editors, giving you a concise summary of the day’s most important headlines. Sign up today. Article content continued

Bibby’s experience is representative of a wider trend in Toronto, where it appears that these smaller units are weighing down the entire market.

According to research firm Urbanation Inc., sales of condos sized at 500 sq. ft. and under were down 20 per cent year over year in September, while sales for units of other size ranges were either flat or still positive. These micro units are also the only condos on the market to have experienced a price decline thus far. And, thanks to a tumbling sales-to-new-listings ratio, they’re the only form of housing that is firmly in buyer’s-market territory.

“It’s become clear that COVID-19 has caused two shifts in demand: A desire for more space and more value-oriented homes outside the core, both of which negatively impact the market for small condos,” said Shaun Hildebrand, president of Urbanation.

Pre-COVID-19, these condos were the hottest on the market. Investors flocked to them because they were the only form of housing under $500,000 available in Toronto and the high rents they could charge on these units meant that making profit was close to a sure thing. Most of them were snatched up on the pre-construction market and as investors became more emboldened by their returns, they bought more units, Hildebrand said.

Now they’re the ones flooding the market with listings. In September, new listings for micro units were up 165 per cent year over year. So many of these condos have hit the market, that active listings now represent 5.2 months of supply. Hildebrand said it is considered a buyer’s market when supply reaches four months.Article content continued

Bibby’s experience is representative of a wider trend in Toronto, where it appears that these smaller units are weighing down the entire market.

According to research firm Urbanation Inc., sales of condos sized at 500 sq. ft. and under were down 20 per cent year over year in September, while sales for units of other size ranges were either flat or still positive. These micro units are also the only condos on the market to have experienced a price decline thus far. And, thanks to a tumbling sales-to-new-listings ratio, they’re the only form of housing that is firmly in buyer’s-market territory.

“It’s become clear that COVID-19 has caused two shifts in demand: A desire for more space and more value-oriented homes outside the core, both of which negatively impact the market for small condos,” said Shaun Hildebrand, president of Urbanation.

Pre-COVID-19, these condos were the hottest on the market. Investors flocked to them because they were the only form of housing under $500,000 available in Toronto and the high rents they could charge on these units meant that making profit was close to a sure thing. Most of them were snatched up on the pre-construction market and as investors became more emboldened by their returns, they bought more units, Hildebrand said.

Now they’re the ones flooding the market with listings. In September, new listings for micro units were up 165 per cent year over year. So many of these condos have hit the market, that active listings now represent 5.2 months of supply. Hildebrand said it is considered a buyer’s market when supply reaches four months.Two hours after WestJet announced on Wednesday that it was curtailing its flights to and from Atlantic Canada, an email went out to all MPs and senators from Liberal MP Chris Bittle, parliamentary secretary to Transport Minister Marc Garneau.

"The COVID-19 pandemic has had a tremendous impact on all aspects of the Canadian economy, but few industries have been more negatively impacted than the air sector," Bittle wrote in a letter first obtained by Radio-Canada.

"Many of you have reached out to us to share your thoughts about the current impact of COVID-19 on the air sector. At this stage, we would like to hear from all parliamentarians [on] what is required to support a robust air sector in Canada."

Last month's throne speech promised "further support for industries that have been the hardest hit, including travel," and the government's consultations on support for the air sector apparently were due to start this week.

While demands for government aid to the air travel sector have been building for months, WestJet's regional retreat will drive those demands to a new level.

For the federal government, the case for doing something to prop up airlines and airports might be stronger than the case for doing nothing. But even if the government wants — or needs — to intervene, it still has to work out a way to do so that it can defend politically.

Bubble trouble

P.E.I. Premier Dennis King was among those calling on the federal government to take action on Wednesday. But it's the region's own "Atlantic bubble" pandemic policy — which imposes registration requirements on travellers from outside of Atlantic Canada and compels them to self-isolate for 14 days upon arrival in the region — that has caused the demand for flights in and out of the region to crater.

The Liberals probably don't want to be blamed if reductions in air service across the country become permanent. And sure enough, New Brunswick Premier Blaine Higgs told CBC's Power & Politics that he came away from a conversation with Intergovernmental Affairs Minister Dominic LeBlanc on Wednesday with the impression that "something's going to happen" for the ailing industry.

WATCH | Atlantic premiers concerned as WestJet ends most flights in region:

Atlantic premiers concerned as WestJet ends most flights in region 9:52 Premiers are expressing concern after WestJet announced it would shut down most of its operations in Atlantic Canada. 9:52

The federal response to the pandemic has not ignored the country's largest companies. All businesses have been able to access the federal wage subsidy. In May, the Liberals rolled out a targeted loan program known as the Large Employer Emergency Financing Facility (LEEFF).

WestJet has made use of the wage subsidy; Richard Bartrem, VP of marketing communications at WestJet, called it "terrifically helpful." WestJet has not sought assistance through the LEEFF program.

"The conditions that were placed [on] it just made it unwieldy in terms of our ability to recover from the pandemic," Bartrem said.

Critics have claimed LEEFF was rolled out too late and offers loans at terms less generous than what is available in the private sector. (When it was introduced, then-finance minister Bill Morneau called the program an option of "last resort" — so it might have been designed to not be popular.)

Only one company has been approved for a LEEFF loan to date, according to the federal government. Not long after the federal government announced that loan to Gateway Casinos (which operates 26 facilities across Canada), Conservative finance critic Pierre Poilievre was on his feet in the House of Commons ripping into the decision as an irresponsible use of public funds.

That's the risk a government takes whenever it offers help to specific firms or industries — even in the midst of a global economic crisis.

The nationalization route

Transport Minister Marc Garneau has had to fend off questions already about compelling airlines to refund customers for flights that were cancelled by the pandemic.

At the time, Garneau's stated reason for not forcing airlines to offer refunds seemed practical. Some struggling airlines might have collapsed completely if they were forced to pay back that money, he said. But if (or when) the federal government offers airlines support, the political conflict over refunds will come roaring back.

When Chrystia Freeland became finance minister in August, the National Airlines Council of Canada, which represents major carriers, wrote to her to outline a request for financial support in the form of "loans, loan guarantees or direct assistance." Airline unions have asked for $7 billion in federal loans.

The airlines also want "a national framework to ease interprovincial travel restrictions ... reciprocal border agreements with targeted safe countries" and the deployment of rapid COVID-19 testing.

Other countries have moved already to rescue their national carriers — in some cases through outright nationalization. The German government, for instance, now owns 20 per cent of Lufthansa. In Canada, any nationalization presumably would have to involve both Air Canada and WestJet.

LEEFF's limitations notwithstanding, the program's design suggests the government knew that it would have to justify and defend any effort to bail out a major corporate entity. LEEFF loan recipients have to abide by conditions that include restrictions on executive compensation and a requirement for climate-risk disclosure. Perhaps new conditions would help make loans for airlines more politically acceptable.

The political downside to bailouts

But even if the Trudeau government changed the terms of LEEFF to make it more industry-friendly, it still could be left to explain why the airline industry — or any other group of wounded firms — deserves special attention right now.

The Liberals have avoided taking a sector-specific approach to pandemic relief to date. If they start providing sector-specific assistance now, the floodgates will open — other sectors will demand the same assistance, or at least call on the Liberals to explain where they're drawing the line and why.

The government's throne speech specifically mentioned one avenue for assistance: supporting regional routes for airlines. "It is essential that Canadians have access to reliable and affordable regional air services," the speech said. "This is an issue of equity, of jobs, and of economic development."

That's a justification for targeted support. Would that be enough?

There's also the question of timing. As Premier Higgs acknowledged in his interview with Power & Politics, financial support will be of limited use as long as large numbers of people are uncomfortable with the idea of flying — and have nowhere to go.

Free-market disciples might turn their noses up at all of this, but the Trudeau government probably doesn't see this as the right moment to insist on laissez-faire economics. And perhaps the other federal parties will be reluctant to make the case for doing nothing as well.

For Trudeau, the challenge is to come up with an approach that makes things better — without making his government's political burden significantly heavier.