Innovation Minister Navdeep Bains speaks at an aerospace conference in Ottawa in November 2018./ Photo via Andrew Meade.

The Liberals’ election commitment to drop wireless prices 25 per cent will happen organically due to changes in the market, and it probably won’t save Canadians the average of $1,000 a year that the party platform promised, Innovation Canada told the Privy Council Office.

That’s because while the Liberal promise targets plans with a specific, mid-range data allowance, Canadians want increasingly larger plans, a PCO analyst outlined in an email obtained through Access to Information.

Analyst Margarete Ling wrote the email following conversations with Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, days after the 2019 federal election in which the Liberals campaigned on the price drop promise.

“ISED estimates the commitment of a 25 percent price decline per gigabyte (GB), over the course of the mandate, will occur organically without intervention beyond measures the government is already taking and therefore, continuing with status quo measures is expected to achieve the desired result,” Ling said in the email.

The reasoning behind ISED’s conclusion is that the Liberal promise was based on a 5 GB plan. Prices are falling globally, which means a customer can get a 5 GB plan for the price of a 2 GB plan a few years ago, the email outlined.

“In this sense, prices are declining organically. However, at the same time, consumption continually increases. Canadians no longer want the lower GB plans. Therefore, it is unlikely that price/GB reductions will result in the promised $1,000 a year savings,” the email said.

“As well, Canadians may not be in a position to realize savings within the lifecycle of their current contracts. Prices might drop, but they are locked in.”

The election platform promised a re-elected Liberal government would “move forward with cutting the cost of these services by 25 per cent in the next two years by using the government’s regulatory powers, saving an average middle class family of four nearly $1,000 per year.”

The government chose in March to focus the commitment on 2 GB to 6 GB post-paid plans from Rogers Communications Inc., Telus Corp. and BCE Inc. It launched a tracker to monitor prices in July.

Innovation Minister Navdeep Bains said in a phone interview in March that the government chose to target “mid-range” plans because they hadn’t seen a significant pricing decline, as had been the case for low-end and high-end plans. The government’s annual pricing report showed that prices for plans with 10 GB of data dropped by 31 per cent in the of summer 2019, for instance.

The PCO email also noted that summer’s price drop as another factor in why prices are expected to drop organically, in addition to set-asides in spectrum auctions for smaller players.

The details in the email were also included in an attached document analyzing the election promises. The document noted that the CRTC is in the process of deciding whether to mandate access by mobile virtual network operators (MVNOs) to incumbent networks. The Liberals also promised to “encourage competition by expanding the entry” of Canadian MVNOs in the wireless market.

The PCO document noted that the government does not have the power to regulate rates directly, or to force the CRTC to facilitate MVNOs, though the federal government can vary a decision once it has been issued. “In the event the government is dissatisfied with the model developed, the government could alter the decision under existing authorities in the Telecommunications Act,” it said.

The partially-redacted document also looked at potential responses to MVNOs, saying that reaction among the provinces and territories might be mixed, with some “supportive of the impact on prices, while others may express concern for reduced investment.”

It added that wireless carriers “will strongly oppose measures to mandate MVNO access, while consumer advocacy groups would support such actions.”

The analysis in the following paragraph is mostly redacted, though it does state that “the general public would be in favour.”

— Reporting by Anja Karadeglija at akarad@thewirereport.ca and editing by Michael Lee-Murphy at mleemurphy@thewirereport.ca Article content

QUEBEC — The new leader of the Parti Québécois on Thursday criticized the Legault government’s decision to provide additional funding to anglophone post-secondary institutions in Montreal, arguing that too little is being done to defend the French language.

“The Quebec government, the CAQ, is investing $750 million to expand Dawson, expand McGill University, and thus accelerate an already present phenomenon of anglicization of students,” Paul St-Pierre Plamondon said.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or PQ leader attacks funding of anglo schools, defends his McGill studies Back to video

Despite the fact there are more francophones and allophones than anglophones in Montreal, English CEGEP students will outnumber French CEGEP students in the city by next year, he asserted. St-Pierre Plamondon wants the number of English students to be equivalent to their percentage of the population.

“We need to address this to make it proportionate,” he said.

The actions of the ruling Coalition Avenir Quebec (CAQ), which purports to be a nationalist party that defends the French language against creeping anglicization, have failed to match their words, St-Pierre Plamondon added.Article content

QUEBEC — The new leader of the Parti Québécois on Thursday criticized the Legault government’s decision to provide additional funding to anglophone post-secondary institutions in Montreal, arguing that too little is being done to defend the French language.

“The Quebec government, the CAQ, is investing $750 million to expand Dawson, expand McGill University, and thus accelerate an already present phenomenon of anglicization of students,” Paul St-Pierre Plamondon said.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or PQ leader attacks funding of anglo schools, defends his McGill studies Back to video

Despite the fact there are more francophones and allophones than anglophones in Montreal, English CEGEP students will outnumber French CEGEP students in the city by next year, he asserted. St-Pierre Plamondon wants the number of English students to be equivalent to their percentage of the population.

“We need to address this to make it proportionate,” he said.

The actions of the ruling Coalition Avenir Quebec (CAQ), which purports to be a nationalist party that defends the French language against creeping anglicization, have failed to match their words, St-Pierre Plamondon added.Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said that applying for the new Canada Recovery Benefit would be "simple" and that no Canadian would be left behind in the transition to a new pandemic benefit.

But some say the application process has been deeply frustrating and they still don't know when — or even if — they'll get the money.

Hajar Pittman told CBC News the application process has been a nightmare.

"I've never felt this hopeless," said the Brampton, Ont. mother of two toddlers. She was on maternity leave when the pandemic hit. She was laid off from her job in the airline industry in June and collected the Canada Emergency Response Benefit (CERB) — the benefit replaced by the CRB — throughout the summer.

Pittman said that when she first tried to apply for the new Canada Recovery Benefit (CRB) on Monday, she got an error message — "COV-026" — telling her she was ineligible for the benefit without explaining why.

It took hours of phone calls with the Canada Revenue Agency, she said, before a CRA agent suggested that the fact she collected parental leave benefits might be causing confusion in the CRB process. Pittman said she has now requested a letter from Service Canada clarifying her status.

Pittman said she was also told she might have to wait 21 business days for that letter to arrive. Once she gets it, she'll have to send it on to the CRA — so she has no idea how long the total application process could take.

In the meantime — instead of the $500 per week she could be collecting from the CRB — she has no money coming in. And looking for a job in a pandemic has led her nowhere.

My kids and I are desperate for help, <a href="https://twitter.com/JustinTrudeau?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@JustinTrudeau</a> I haven’t been able to apply for the CRB even though I meet all the requirements, <a href="https://twitter.com/CanRevAgency?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@CanRevAgency</a> can’t give me a reason why. Please help <a href="https://twitter.com/theJagmeetSingh?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@theJagmeetSingh</a> —@HajarPittman

"I'm relying on family and friends and savings that I've put away over the years," she told CBC News.

"I'm just hoping and praying that this will be resolved soon because I don't know how long I can go without collecting any financial support from the government. I was really relying on that for myself and my children."

She's not alone. CBC News has received at least three dozen complaints about access to the benefit.

Tracey Crosson, administrator of the "Canadians on $2000/month CERB support group" on Facebook, said she's seeing dozens of complaints a day from people struggling to access the CRB.

"People are having a real hard time with it. They're getting errors and it shouldn't be that way."

Confusion over EI applications

Crosson said the comments she's seen in the Facebook group suggest many people are experiencing problems because they've applied for Employment Insurance in the past but are no longer eligible.

Changes to the federal government's suite of pandemic benefits made more Canadians eligible for Employment Insurance. Those who are eligible for EI are supposed to use it. Those who aren't are expected to apply for the CRB.

Crosson said Trudeau's claim that no one would be left behind in the transition from the CERB to the CRB rings hollow now.

"Why is it that there are people slipping through the cracks?" she asked.

(Crosson's Facebook group was set up by UBIWorks, a non-profit that advocates for universal basic income.)

The Canada Revenue Agency said in a statement that it is aware some applicants are receiving error codes related to their eligibility.

It said when people apply through CRA's "My Account" online or through the automated phone line, the applications go through a verification process.

"The system checks a variety of data sources to determine eligibility," the statement said. "For example, the CRA can verify if the $5,000 income threshold has been met, or detect the possibility of fraud. Applicants who are deemed ineligible for CRB may still be eligible for EI."

The statement noted that as of end of day Wednesday, 497,100 applications had been approved for the CRB.

The agency did not say how many people had been told they were not eligible for the benefit.

Brace for delays, says Service Canada

To handle what's expected to be an unprecedented number of EI claims and a record number of calls over the coming weeks, Service Canada has almost doubled its complement of specialized call centre agents. It's still warning people to expect long waits.

Mara Del Bianco said she also got a 'COV-026' message telling her she was ineligible for benefits without telling her why. Her problem appears to be similar to Pittman's — involving a past claim for benefits for which she is no longer eligible.

Del Bianco said she also spent hours on hold with the CRA and Service Canada. She described the process as confused; at one point, she said, she was asked to provide documents by fax.

She also asked for a letter clarifying her EI eligibility. Like Pittman, she's still waiting for it.

"[I'm] stressed out. Tired," she said. "Just trying to ... I'm trying to keep things afloat."

For Pittman, it's been especially maddening to witness what she called a lack of communication between Service Canada and the CRA.

More than anything, though, she just wants her situation resolved quickly.

"I'm left behind. I'm not getting any financial support right now."