Premier Doug Ford may have no choice but to raise taxes next year in order to begin tackling Ontario’s record budget deficit, the province’s fiscal watchdog warns.

With coffers at Queen’s Park ravaged by COVID-19, the independent Financial Accountability Office said Thursday that taxation levels might have to rise.

“If the government were to permanently increase personal income tax revenue by 10 per cent or around $500 per tax filer, starting in 2021-22, the budget deficit would improve by $3.7 billion in the first year and by $4.8 billion by 2025-26,” the office said in a 20-page report.

Speaking to reporters at his daily Queen’s Park teleconference, Ford expressed reluctance at hiking taxes.

“We never believed in this when we first took office about raising taxes. We can drive efficiencies,” the premier said.

The FAO is projecting an Ontario deficit of $37.2 billion this year “due to a sharp drop in revenue coupled with a strong increase in program spending.”

Finance Minister Rod Phillips, who will table a budget next month, has projected the shortfall could be even higher — $38.5 billion — because of the pandemic that has plunged the country into recession.

Phillips has some wiggle room because the FAO pointed out there is still “$9.3 billion in unused contingency funds to specific programs” that could be used to reduce the deficit.

But Ford stressed “we do plan on spending that money” to help deal with the fallout of the virus.

“There’s always things popping up constantly,” he said.

Hopes that Ontario will get back in the black appear to have been dashed for the foreseeable future.

“If the government chose to balance the budget over the next five years, as in its previous recovery plan from the 2019 budget, the FAO estimates that it would require roughly $14 billion in permanent revenue increases or spending cuts, or some combination of both,” the watchdog’s report said.

But Treasury Board President Peter Bethlenfalvy conceded “we’re not going to be balancing for the pre-COVID numbers, I think that’s just the reality.”

Underscoring that “the COVID-19 pandemic and shutdowns have resulted in a historic negative shock to Ontario’s economy,” the FAO said things could have been worse.

“Initial measures to contain the pandemic in Ontario were relatively successful in limiting the spread of the virus through the summer, allowing for an earlier and broader reopening of the economy than first anticipated.”

Indeed, the FAO’s gloomy outlook is actually an improvement upon its projections from when the coronavirus, which has killed more than 2,900 Ontarians and cost 1.2 million jobs, struck in March.

“Faced with a potentially unprecedented economic crisis, the federal and provincial governments quickly introduced, and subsequently enhanced, a variety of programs designed to support household and business incomes during the crisis,” the report said.

“As a result, economic activity began to rebound in May, with stronger than expected gains in employment, household spending and housing investment,” it noted.

Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading...

“Compared to the FAO’s spring outlook, the decline in economic activity in 2020 is now expected to be less severe. However, the pace of the recovery is expected to moderate through the fall and into next year as government supports begin to taper, some sectors continue to struggle because of restrictions, and significant uncertainty about the future path of the pandemic weighs on the broader economy.”

Ontario’s real gross domestic product is expected to shrink by 6.8 per cent this year, which is better than the nine per cent the FAO feared in the spring.

“Even so, this year’s downturn is expected to be the largest annual decline in economic output on record.”

Things should begin rebounding next year with the fiscal office predicting a healthy 5.1 per cent GDP growth.

Unemployment, which is projected to reach a 26-year high of 9.7 per cent this year, should drop to 8.5 per cent in 2021.

Tax revenues are expected to plunge by 11.2 per cent — $12.1 billion — in 2020-21, offset by a $7.2 billion infusion of federal cash to help with COVID-19.

But NDP Leader Andrea Horwath said “Ford’s penny-pinching has put Ontario on the brink of another health and economic disaster.”

“Doug Ford is sitting on $9.3 billion earmarked for COVID-19 that could make our schools safer, provide protections for seniors and workers in care homes, or increase testing and contact tracing,” Horwath wrote on Twitter.

Liberal MPP Mitzie Hunter (Scarborough-Guildwood) said “Ford has the means, from federal transfers given months ago, to take action.

“Investing sooner could prevent disastrous impacts on our long-term economic recovery,” she said.

Correction — Oct. 15, 2020: This article was edited from a previous version that misstated the projected unemployment rate for 2021.

Robert Benzie is the Star’s Queen’s Park bureau chief and a reporter covering Ontario politics. Follow him on Twitter: @robertbenzie

Read more about: