Article content

Winter is coming for the Calgary area this weekend as a low-pressure system is expected to bring snow, strong winds and temperatures below the freezing point.

As of Thursday morning, Calgary along with much of Alberta south of Grande Prairie is currently under a special weather statement. A band of snow will likely produce up to 10 cm of snow by Friday afternoon, with higher amounts along the foothills and in the mountain parks.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Winter storm expected to hit Calgary and area this weekend with snow, wind and colder temperatures Back to video

Although much of the Calgary area had some snow this week, the anticipated drop in temperature is what makes the coming storm noteworthy, said Blaine Lowry, a meteorologist with Environment and Climate Change Canada, on Wednesday afternoon.

“We’re going from temperatures that were in the low to mid-20s a couple of weekends ago to seeing this weekend’s highs struggling to make it above zero and accumulating snow across lots of central and southern Alberta,” said Lowry. Bonjour mes amis,

Plusieurs usagers dans les derniers mois et dans le recensement ont exprimé leur désir d’avoir accès à une plateforme pour pratiquer leurs habiletés en français et les améliorer davantage. Dans cet esprit, nous accueillerons les « vendredis français ». Ce seront des fils punaisés tous les vendredis dans le but particulier de pratiquer, de lire et d’écrire en français. Nous espérons identifier un thème de départ pour lancer la discussion, mais toute discussion en français est bienvenue dans le fil.

Les règles de ce fil sont plutôt simples :

Toutes les règles habituelles du sous-reddit sont toujours en vigueur Essayez d’écrire en français autant que possible, même si votre français est cassé Évitez les discussions de nature politique pour garder l’objectif des conversations à propos de l’utilisation de la langue, et idéalement pas de façon argumentative.

Les francophones de langue maternelle et les apprenants potentiels sont encouragés à se joindre à la discussion et à favoriser les apprentissages. Plus tard, nous travaillerons à créer un insigne pour ceux qui facilitent ces discussions pour les y identifier.

Ce n’est pas l’endroit pour remettre en question le rôle du français dans la société, du gouvernement ou de la politique canadienne ou pour attaquer les communautés francophones. Le français est parlé par des Canadiens d’un bout à l’autre de notre grand pays et l’intention est ici d’encourager les utilisateurs à développer leurs habiletés linguistiques.

Vous pouvez bien sûr visiter r/quebec, r/french, r/learnfrench, r/francophonie, r/francaiscanadien ou r/france pour continuer votre apprentissage tous les jours de la semaine. Il y a aussi un salon Discord disponible pour apprendre le français. Vous pouvez aussi en profiter pour proposer des thèmes pour les semaines à venir. Si vous avez des questions, sentez-vous bien à l’aise de les poser dans cette chaîne de commentaires, ou d’envoyer un message à la modération.

Bonjour mes amis,

Many users over the past few months and in the census have expressed interest in a platform in which to practice their French language skills and develop them further. In that spirit, we will be hosting "French Fridays". This will consist of a stickied thread each Friday for the express purpose of practicing, reading and writing in French. We will aim to identify a starting theme to initiate a discussion, but the post is welcome to any discussion in French.

The rules of this thread are fairly straight forward:

All subreddit rules are still in effect Try to post using as much French as possible, even if your French is broken Try to avoid discussions political in nature to keep the conversations focused on the use of the language and ideally not argumentative.

Native French speakers as well as prospective learners are encouraged to join into the discussion and encourage learning. Moving forward we will be working to develop a flair for those who facilitate or are assisting in these discussions to identify them within these discussions.

This is not the forum to discuss the role of French in Canadian society, government, politics, or attack French communities. French is spoken by Canadians from coast to coast to coast, and the intent of this is to encourage users to develop their language skills. You can, of course, visit r/quebec, r/french, r/learnfrench, r/francophonie, r/francaiscanadien, or r/france to go on learning on any day of the week. There is also a Discord chatroom available for learning french.

If you have questions, please feel free to make them within this comment chain, or to message the moderators.Bonjour mes amis,

Plusieurs usagers dans les derniers mois et dans le recensement ont exprimé leur désir d’avoir accès à une plateforme pour pratiquer leurs habiletés en français et les améliorer davantage. Dans cet esprit, nous accueillerons les « vendredis français ». Ce seront des fils punaisés tous les vendredis dans le but particulier de pratiquer, de lire et d’écrire en français. Nous espérons identifier un thème de départ pour lancer la discussion, mais toute discussion en français est bienvenue dans le fil.

Les règles de ce fil sont plutôt simples :

Toutes les règles habituelles du sous-reddit sont toujours en vigueur Essayez d’écrire en français autant que possible, même si votre français est cassé Évitez les discussions de nature politique pour garder l’objectif des conversations à propos de l’utilisation de la langue, et idéalement pas de façon argumentative.

Les francophones de langue maternelle et les apprenants potentiels sont encouragés à se joindre à la discussion et à favoriser les apprentissages. Plus tard, nous travaillerons à créer un insigne pour ceux qui facilitent ces discussions pour les y identifier.

Ce n’est pas l’endroit pour remettre en question le rôle du français dans la société, du gouvernement ou de la politique canadienne ou pour attaquer les communautés francophones. Le français est parlé par des Canadiens d’un bout à l’autre de notre grand pays et l’intention est ici d’encourager les utilisateurs à développer leurs habiletés linguistiques.

Vous pouvez bien sûr visiter r/quebec, r/french, r/learnfrench, r/francophonie, r/francaiscanadien ou r/france pour continuer votre apprentissage tous les jours de la semaine. Il y a aussi un salon Discord disponible pour apprendre le français. Vous pouvez aussi en profiter pour proposer des thèmes pour les semaines à venir. Si vous avez des questions, sentez-vous bien à l’aise de les poser dans cette chaîne de commentaires, ou d’envoyer un message à la modération.

Bonjour mes amis,

Many users over the past few months and in the census have expressed interest in a platform in which to practice their French language skills and develop them further. In that spirit, we will be hosting "French Fridays". This will consist of a stickied thread each Friday for the express purpose of practicing, reading and writing in French. We will aim to identify a starting theme to initiate a discussion, but the post is welcome to any discussion in French.

The rules of this thread are fairly straight forward:

All subreddit rules are still in effect Try to post using as much French as possible, even if your French is broken Try to avoid discussions political in nature to keep the conversations focused on the use of the language and ideally not argumentative.

Native French speakers as well as prospective learners are encouraged to join into the discussion and encourage learning. Moving forward we will be working to develop a flair for those who facilitate or are assisting in these discussions to identify them within these discussions.

This is not the forum to discuss the role of French in Canadian society, government, politics, or attack French communities. French is spoken by Canadians from coast to coast to coast, and the intent of this is to encourage users to develop their language skills. You can, of course, visit r/quebec, r/french, r/learnfrench, r/francophonie, r/francaiscanadien, or r/france to go on learning on any day of the week. There is also a Discord chatroom available for learning french.

If you have questions, please feel free to make them within this comment chain, or to message the moderators.'We will be here until the Liberals stop obstructing,' NDP MP Charlie Angus, pictured here in 2018, told committee members today (Thursday). (iPolitics/Matthew Usherwood)

Liberal MPs are continuing to filibuster two House of Commons committees to avoid voting on motions that would reopen the investigation of the WE Charity scandal.

If adopted, motions before both the finance and ethics committees would request documents related to the WE Charity affair.

A filibuster is a political procedure where one or more members of Parliament debate over a proposed piece of legislation so as to delay or entirely prevent a decision being made on the proposal.

The WE Charity controversy came to light this summer after the Trudeau government outsourced the $500-million Canada Student Service Grant (CSSG) — a program to pay students for volunteering — to WE Charity, an organization with which his family, and that of then-finance minister Bill Morneau, had close financial ties for years.

Conservative MP Michael Barrett, who introduced a motion currently under debate in the ethics committee, said the hours the Liberals have spent filibustering and supporting the government’s “cover-up” of the WE controversy isn’t yielding the results Canadians deserve.

“It’s certainly high time for this to come to a vote,” he said Thursday as debate reached its third hour, adding that he expects hours more of debate on the motion.

Barrett’s motion would allow the committee to obtain a record of all speaking appearances since 2008 by Trudeau, his wife, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, his mother, Margaret Trudeau, and his brother, Alexandre Trudeau.

The documents also include any fees and reimbursements, and the name of the company that booked the appearances. Barrett asked that the documents be forwarded to the clerk of the committee within 24 hours of the motion’s adoption, and that they be reviewed in camera (behind closed doors).

A similar motion was brought before the ethics committee in July, when Liberal MPs spent nearly four hours filibustering debate before the clock ran out to vote on the motion. The motion eventually passed on July 22 with all Liberal MPs voting against it.

New Democrat MP Charlie Angus said on Thursday that he didn’t understand the Liberals’ “obstruction” of Barrett’s motion, because it had already been passed in July. The documents ordered in July ultimately didn’t flow to committee members, because the probe was halted when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau prorogued Parliament in August.

“We will be here until the Liberals stop obstructing,” Angus told committee members.

Opposition members sought to bring the motion to a vote around 4:30 p.m., but Liberal MP Han Dong said there was still quite an extensive speaker’s list of committee members who wished to discuss the motion.

Liberal MP Patricia Lattanzio said the members need all the answers and information before they can make a decision on the motion.

Thursday’s meeting was the committee’s third debating Barrett’s motion. The meeting began shortly after 2:30 p.m. in Ottawa and did not adjourn until almost 11 p.m., after over eight hours of debate.

READ MORE: Liberal MPs filibuster motion to review WE Charity payments to Trudeaus — again

The House finance committee meeting also dragged on through Thursday, in which members discussed a motion from Conservative MP and committee vice-chair, Pierre Poilievre.

The motion, which was introduced last week on a point of privilege, would allow finance committee members to gain access to previously pre-redacted documents related to the WE Charity scandal.

One of the last acts of Parliament that Trudeau allowed before he ordered it prorogued was for 5,000 pages of documents to be distributed to members of the finance committee. The documents, which contained correspondence about the Liberal government’s decision to grant WE Charity the CSSG, were released with some pages already blacked out.

In a letter obtained by iPolitics, Philippe Dufresne, the law clerk and parliamentary counsel for the House of Commons, said the Commons and its committees are the appropriate authority to determine acceptable reasons for withholding the documents.

“As my office has not been given the opportunity to see the un-redacted documents, we are not able to confirm whether those redactions are consistent with the order of the committee,” he wrote to committee clerk David Gagnon in a letter dated Aug. 18.

Poilievre’s motion seeks to give the committee access to the un-redacted version of the documents between the government and WE Charity — or from senior officials to cabinet ministers regarding the CSSG from March 2020 — which were first ordered by the committee in the previous session on July 7. If adopted, the documents would then be sent the House law clerk who would be responsible for redactions.

READ MORE: Libs delay vote to release documents on Trudeau family’s paid speeches at WE Charity events

Mark Kennedy, a spokesman for government House leader Pablo Rodriguez, said the finance committee should get to hear from the public servants who did the redactions, as well as the law clerk and parliamentary counsel.

“What the opposition is doing is finding officials to have breached privileges of Parliament without even providing them the due process to explain themselves,” he said in an emailed statement. “Due process is important to us.”

The committee, Kennedy said, can take whatever action it deems necessary if it’s still unsatisfied after hearing from the witnesses.

Liberal MPs on the finance committee have so far refused to vote on Poilievre’s motion, and instead spent the meeting arguing that the motion should not have been introduced on a point of privilege. They also said the committee should instead be discussing a motion to begin pre-budget consultations, on which Canadians would prefer it spends its time.

Liberal MP Julie Dzerowicz said this could all be avoided if the Conservatives pulled their motion and agreed to begin pre-budget consultations.

The committee meeting began at 11 a.m. on Thursday. It finally adjourned at 10:17 p.m., after 11 hours of debate, with the support of all Liberal MPs on the committee, and Bloc Québécois MP Gabriel Ste-Marie.

It was finance’s second meeting discussing the motion, and the committee will reconvene on Friday.

Earlier this week, Trudeau told reporters that the House investigations of WE Charity are “petty politics.”

“We have an awful lot of work to do, and we’re going to continue doing it,” he said Tuesday. “The opposition can focus on whatever it is they want. We will stay focused on Canadians.”

READ MORE: Liberal committee chairs are inappropriately cancelling meetings, say Tory MPs

This story was updated on Thursday evening with a comment from Mark Kennedy, spokesman for government House leader Pablo Rodriguez. It was also updated to include the time the finance and ethics committee meetings ended.