The average price of a home sold on the Canadian Real Estate Association's MLS service went for $604,000 in September, an all-time record and an increase of more than 17 per cent in the past year.

The group that represents 130,000 Canadian Realtors said that in addition to smashing the previous record on the price side, it was also the busiest September ever in terms of the volume of homes sold, with an additional 20,000 transactions logged on top of the previous record.

Thursday's numbers are the latest eye-popping figures to come out about Canada's housing market, which has defied expectations since March.

The pandemic caused home sales to crater in March and April because of widespread lockdowns but has come out on fire every month since.

Having to spend months locked down in their homes seems to have ignited a desire in buyers for more space, which is why detached properties in suburbs around major cities are driving the gains. "Home has been our workplace, our kids' schools, the gym, the park and more," CREA's chief economist Shaun Cathcart said. "Personal space is more important than ever."

CREA said its average price is not the best gauge of the market because it is easily skewed by sales of expensive homes in Toronto and Vancouver. The group said if those two cities are stripped out, the average Canadian home sold last month went for $479,000. But that figure has risen by even more than the overall average, up by more that 20 per cent in the past year.

Indeed, it's not just Toronto and Vancouver that are seeing booming sales in the suburbs. "We have also seen increased demand for properties outside of the city in our bedroom communities, especially recreational properties," said real estate broker Corinne Lyall with Royal LePage in Calgary. A total of 2,405 homes changed hands during the month in the city. That's up by more than 30 per cent in the past year and almost 10 per cent in the past month alone.

COVID-19 causing buyers to look further afield in housing market 1:50 Ontario family buys a home in New Brunswick without seeing it in person. 1:50

Impact of lower rates

In addition to pandemic-induced demand for space, the housing market has been buoyed by record low interest rates, which can make more expensive homes feel more affordable.

A simple look at the numbers can show how. With a $120,000 down payment in hand, a would-be buyer can afford to buy a $500,000 home and pay $2,210 a month on a standard 25-year mortgage at five per cent.

But if the borrower's rate comes down to 2.8 per cent, that same buyer can now afford a home that costs $600,000. That's an extra $100,000 worth of purchasing power, but all it would cost the buyer is an extra $12 a month.

With forces like that at play, the housing market's counterintuitive rise amid a pandemic starts to make a bit of sense.

"But the question now becomes whether this momentum is sustainable," TD Bank economist Rishi Sondhi said.

He chalks up a big part of the current boom to pent-up demand after a muted spring selling season. But that's largely in the past now, so "home sales are set to cool from their unsustainable third quarter pace over the next few quarters," Sondhi said. Article content continued

Dig deeper into the report and you see that nine doctors returned to Alberta, 142 are newly-licensed Alberta trainees, and 139 are new to Alberta but trained somewhere else. You can also see something more important. For those who aren’t working in Alberta anymore, four gave up their licence, five were suspended, three passed away, and 22 retired. The number who left Alberta: 13.

The third-quarter report is a snapshot in time and should be taken with a grain of salt, but taking a hard look at the information contained within and comparing it to trends seen in previous years shows no striking changes. This gives patients in Alberta a glimpse of what we know to be true, but critics ignore: hundreds of physicians come and go every year for different reasons, all of them perfectly understandable.

It’s not easy to talk about how much taxpayers should pay Alberta’s doctors. We pay our 11,000 doctors over $5 billion. That’s 10 per cent of the entire provincial budget. The right amount should take into account the province’s financial situation, generously compensate doctors, and consider regional differences.

I believe we’ve made every effort to do exactly that. For example, this spring we brought in the most comprehensive plan in Canada for recruiting and retaining doctors in our rural communities: increasing how much we pay rural doctors, purchasing dedicated spots in medical schools for students willing to commit to working in rural Alberta, and a raft of other changes.Article content continued

Dig deeper into the report and you see that nine doctors returned to Alberta, 142 are newly-licensed Alberta trainees, and 139 are new to Alberta but trained somewhere else. You can also see something more important. For those who aren’t working in Alberta anymore, four gave up their licence, five were suspended, three passed away, and 22 retired. The number who left Alberta: 13.

The third-quarter report is a snapshot in time and should be taken with a grain of salt, but taking a hard look at the information contained within and comparing it to trends seen in previous years shows no striking changes. This gives patients in Alberta a glimpse of what we know to be true, but critics ignore: hundreds of physicians come and go every year for different reasons, all of them perfectly understandable.

It’s not easy to talk about how much taxpayers should pay Alberta’s doctors. We pay our 11,000 doctors over $5 billion. That’s 10 per cent of the entire provincial budget. The right amount should take into account the province’s financial situation, generously compensate doctors, and consider regional differences.

I believe we’ve made every effort to do exactly that. For example, this spring we brought in the most comprehensive plan in Canada for recruiting and retaining doctors in our rural communities: increasing how much we pay rural doctors, purchasing dedicated spots in medical schools for students willing to commit to working in rural Alberta, and a raft of other changes.The Chinese ambassador to Canada warned the Trudeau government today not to grant asylum to Hong Kong residents fleeing a widely criticized national security law imposed by Beijing.

"We strongly urge the Canadian side not (to) grant so-called political asylum to those violent criminals in Hong Kong," Ambassador Cong Peiwu said in a video press conference from the Chinese Embassy in Ottawa.

He said that would amount to "interference in China's domestic affairs, and certainly it will embolden those violent criminals."

Hong Kong was supposed to operate under a "one country, two systems" deal after Britain handed its former colony over to Beijing in 1997 under an international agreement. But human rights and pro-democracy advocates say Beijing's new national security law is undermining freedom in what is known as the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.

"So if the Canadian side really cares about the stability and the prosperity in Hong Kong, and really cares about the good health and safety of those 300,000 Canadian passport holders in Hong Kong, and the large number of Canadian companies operating in Hong Kong SAR, you should support those efforts to fight violent crimes," Cong said.

Cong also flatly rejected Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's assertion that China is engaging in coercive diplomacy by imprisoning two Canadian men in retaliation for the arrest of a Chinese high-tech executive on an American extradition warrant. Meng Wanzhou is living under house arrest in Vancouver while her case wends through a British Columbia court.

In December 2018, China imprisoned Michael Kovrig and Michael Spavor and charged them with undermining the country's national security. Cong said they are still undergoing a legal process in China but did not provide further details.

He repeated his government's demand that Canada release Meng immediately but insisted her case and his government's prosecution of Kovrig and Spavor are not linked.

"We will remain absolutely committed to working with our allies to ensure that China's approach of coercive diplomacy, its arbitrary detention of two Canadian citizens, alongside other citizens of other countries around the world, is not viewed as a successful tactic by them," Trudeau said earlier this week as the two countries marked 50 years of relations at one of the lowest points in Canada-China bilateral relations.

Cong said Canada's efforts to get other countries to join its fight for Kovrig and Spavor is "doomed to fail."

The European Union raised concerns about the two Canadians by name in the communique summarizing its recent summit with China.

"We oppose any remarks that interfere in our internal affairs. And I would like to point out, there is no coercive diplomacy on the Chinese side," Cong said.