In the wake of attacks against a First Nation’s fishery in southeastern Nova Scotia, questions are being raised about a lack of RCMP enforcement — which many say might have nipped the conflict in the bud.

On Thursday, Sipekne’katik Chief Mike Sack sent a message to Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, asking him to send more law enforcement to the area to quell the conflict and counter actions he has described as hate crimes.

“This truly is systemic racism,” Sack said. “Does Trudeau care about our people? Does he care about reconciliation? They talk about it, but I don’t see any actions toward it.”

Two days earlier, about 200 men descended at different times on a pair of lobster-storage sites being used by the Sipekne’katik First Nation for the moderate livelihood lobster fishery it has undertaken.

The fishery has been launched in the face of opposition from non-Indigenous fishers and long-unresolved negotiations with the federal government over what constitutes a “moderate livelihood.”

At the first site, in New Edinburgh, police reported seeing a van set afire, and people throwing rocks and causing damage to the building and vehicles. At the second, in nearby Middle West Pubnico, the mob trapped a Sipekne’katik fisher inside, hurling rocks and racial taunts until the man was forced to leave without the lobster he’d caught that day. RCMP reportedly advised the fisherman he would have to leave.

No charges have been laid in the incidents.

The actions follow reports of Indigenous lobster lines being cut, traps being pulled up and, in one case, a fishing boat set ablaze when the Sipekne’katik launched its fishery weeks earlier.

No charges have been laid in those instances, either.

The Sipekne’katik chief said he’s been forestalling calls to bring in Indigenous warriors from across the country to take up enforcement in a situation where he believes both the Department of Fisheries and Oceans and the RCMP have been lacking.

“My belief is that everything could have been a lot safer if the DFO acted in the first place, and some of those commercial fishermen were held accountable and charged for their actions,” he said.

“(They’re) believing that they can do whatever they want, and get away with it and take the law into their own hands. And I’m starting to believe that’s true.”

He said the band is in the process of pursuing lawsuits against those who are interfering with its fishery.

RCMP Sgt. Andrew Joyce, meanwhile, said the immediate priority for the police force in the dispute has been to prevent loss of life.

“As a police force, we come to an incident and we’re severely outnumbered. You have 200 or so individuals who have high emotion to an issue, and are confronting another, smaller group of individuals. Our main goal here is the protection of life,” he said.

“We’re trying to make sure nobody is grievously hurt, or worse. We recognize that during this incident, that that there was criminal behaviour. It was being videoed. We understand all that.”

But Joyce said, under those circumstances each arrest would have taken two officers away from a situation in which they were already outnumbered. He also said that the fact that no charges have been laid as yet does not preclude charges for those incidents being laid in the future.

“There are there are some out there who feel that the police response was inadequate. (That) we didn’t do a good job. That’s their right to say that, and I respect them for saying that,” he said.

“A lot of those emotions come from either interactions or frustration over this specific issue of where it is going. And I can’t say this enough. This issue, I’m no expert on. But I do know it is not a police issue. I think we’ll all agree to that.”

The Sipekne’katik cite a Supreme Court of Canada decision in 1999 that acknowledge their treaty right to fish for a modest livelihood. Non-Indigenous fishermen argue that they are opposed to the band’s decision to start a commercial lobster fishing business that is operating outside the federally regulated lobster season.

Colin Sproul, head of the Bay of Fundy Inshore Fishermen’s Association, said he condemns the violence but added it is the product of years of growing concern about the state of the stocks.

Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading...

“We’re Canadians. We should expect that dialogue is always the way to solve our problems, not through violence,” he said.

He also criticized the Mounties for failing to take action against any of the parties to the dispute. He said he was dumbfounded a few weeks ago when he saw Indigenous fishers trying to board a non-Indigenous boat in St. Mary’s Bay while an RCMP tactical squad observed.

“I can accept that Indigenous people may have seen acts of violence perpetrated against them that the RCMP walked away from, too,” he said.

In Ottawa, Minister of Indigenous Services Marc Miller said he found the images of Tuesday night’s violence alarming.

“We’re talking about a fundamental right to earn a moderate livelihood, that is a right the Mi’kmaq are entitled to exercise,” Miller said. He noted that “moderate livelihood” has never been defined in a way that’s acceptable to all sides and said non-Indigenous fishers need be involved in the discussion.

“The risk, if we don’t get this right, is that people will die. ... Violence begets violence, and that is unacceptable,” he said.

Following a cabinet meeting Thursday, Nova Scotia Premier Stephen McNeil said he was “extremely disappointed” by the federal response to date around the Indigenous lobster fishery. McNeil said Ottawa needs to find a workable solution by sitting down with all sides in the dispute as soon as possible.

“This is only getting more entrenched ... they need to be in the same room so everyone knows what each other is saying,” he said.

McNeil also said the province would provide police with the “resources necessary,” including manpower to ensure public safety in the area. “If more people are required, we obviously would have to pick up that bill,” he said.

Provincial Justice Minister Mark Furey said he was satisfied with the RCMP response, adding that he thought it’s been a “measured approach” under difficult circumstances.

Sack said during the news conference the Mi’kmaq fishery will continue despite the damage done to the holding facilities, the burning of one fisherman’s boat and damage to vehicles in recent weeks.

He said the band is now in the process of purchasing the damaged plant in New Edinburgh, which he said would include a buyer’s licence if the sale is completed. “It’s just a matter of doing the paperwork,” he said.

With files from The Canadian Press.

Read more about:OTTAWA – Canada’s Global Affairs officials summoned China’s top diplomat in Canada for a private dressing down Thursday after remarks he made warning Canada against offering political asylum to Hong Kong democracy activists.

But Conservative Leader Erin O’Toole says if Ambassador Cong Peiwu does not publicly apologize for his “belligerent” comments, which O’Toole called a threat to Canadians, Ottawa should kick him out.

In a statement Friday, O’Toole took a much harder line than the Liberal government did — at least publicly — to comments made by Cong in a virtual news conference Thursday on the 50th anniversary of Canada-China diplomatic ties. That’s when Cong warned Canada against emboldening Hong Kong “criminals” and against interfering in China’s internal affairs.

O’Toole said if no apology is offered, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau should immediately withdraw Cong’s diplomatic credentials.

“The Chinese ambassador has decided to engage in belligerent rhetoric unbecoming of his office,” said O’Toole. “To be clear, this was a threat to the 300,000 Canadians in Hong Kong. And a barely veiled one at that.”

“It was of the kind of tone and tenor one would expect from someone seeking protection money — not someone who is the official emissary of a member of the United Nations Security Council.”

“A threat to Canadians anywhere, is a threat to Canadians everywhere,” he added.

O’Toole repeated long-standing calls on the Liberal government to expedite entry to Canada for pro-democracy protestors and political refugees fleeing Hong Kong and to impose sanctions under the Magnitsky Act, which target officials individually for human rights violations, “against those responsible for imposing a draconian national security law” in Hong Kong, which he said violates the Sino-British Joint Declaration, an international treaty.

Canada’s Foreign Affairs Minister François-Philippe Champagne said Thursday he asked Global Affairs to call in the ambassador “to make clear in no uncertain terms that Canada will always stand up for human rights and the rights of Canadians around the world.”

Global Affairs officials confirmed to the Star they met with the ambassador Thursday and delivered the message.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said Friday his government isn’t looking “to escalate” tensions with China, but it will not stand down on its advocacy for human rights or “calling out China for its coercive diplomacy.”

Trudeau says China’s 2018 detention of Michael Kovrig and Michael Spavor is unjustified, tied to China’s demand that Canada release Huawei executive Meng Wanzhou, who is battling extradition from Canada to the U.S.

“We will make sure that China knows that not only are we standing up for human rights, calling on a safe return of the two Michaels who’ve been arbitrarily detained, but we stand with allies around the world and the United States, to Australia, to Great Britain, to European nations, to many nations in every corner of the world who share these concerns.”

In a news conference by zoom Thursday, the Chinese ambassador warned the Canadian government against admitting Hong Kong dissidents as refugees, or any action to declare China’s treatment of its Uighur minority population as “genocide” as a group of MPs and senators have called for. He said Kovrig and Spavor are in the hands of China’s “independent” judicial system.

“We strongly urge the Canadian side not (to) grant so-called political asylum to those violent criminals in Hong Kong because it is the interference in China’s domestic affairs and certainly it will embolden those violent criminals,” he said.

“So if the Canadian side really cares about the stability and prosperity in Hong Kong and really cares about the good health and safety of those 300,000 Canadian passport holders in Hong Kong and the large number of Canadian companies operating in Hong Kong SAR, you should support those efforts to fight violent crime…to make sure the one country, two systems is most definitely and comprehensively implemented in Hong Kong.”

Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading...

Cong later denied he was making any threat. “That’s your interpretation,” he told a Star reporter.

O’Toole chided the ambassador: “Canada is a smaller country on an economic basis when compared to China, but our commitment to liberty, human rights, and the rule of law towers above the conduct of this ambassador.”

Read more about: