Prime Minister Justin Trudeau today defended the federal government's response to an escalating standoff over a Mi'kmaw fishery in Nova Scotia, saying Ottawa has been "extremely active" in trying to resolve the situation.

Speaking to reporters, he called for an end to the violence and harassment that has been on the rise over the past week in several fishing communities in the southwestern part of the province.

"We are expecting the RCMP and police services to do their jobs and keep people safe," Trudeau said.

"I think there's been some concern that that hasn't been done well enough and that's certainly something we will be looking at very closely."

On Thursday, the chief of the Sipekne'katik First Nation urged Trudeau to step in and make sure those involved in the violence are prosecuted.

On Tuesday night, two facilities storing lobster caught by Mi'kmaw fishermen were raided and vandalized by a mob of hundreds of non-Indigenous commercial fishermen. The raids in the fishing communities of New Edinburgh and Middle West Pubnico are part of a series of incidents connected to the fight over a "moderate livelihood" lobster fishery that was launched by the Sipekne'katik First Nation in September.

On Friday, Sack also warned Sipekne'katik fishers about commercial fishermen "taking matters into their own hands" and urged members of the community to get off the water.

He told reporters that several traps belonging to Mi'kmaw fishermen have been cut and roughly three boats belonging to band members were out on the water in St. Marys Bay.

"We're trying everything we can to make sure that they're safe, but I can't blame them for wanting to go out and protect what is theirs," Sack said.

Chief Mike Sack said Friday that commercial fishing boats were on their way to haul Mi'kmaw fishermen's gear on Friday morning. (CBC)

Stuart Knockwood, an official with Sipekne'katik First Nation, said some Mi'kmaw fishermen went out on the water Friday to retrieve their gear, fearing it would be tampered with.

Knockwood went on out on the water himself to look for evidence of interference with the Mi'kmaw fishing operation. He said he came back with a buoy that had been sliced open and some small pieces of fishing line that had been cut.

"The rest of the line is at the bottom of the water," he said.

Knockwood said he also took photos of two fishing vessels in the area, although he doesn't know for sure if they were the culprits. He said the band will pass along the information to the federal Department of Fisheries and Oceans and the RCMP in the hopes that they'll investigate and lay any appropriate charges.

Sack said while he had a promising conversation with federal Fisheries Minister Bernadette Jordan on Thursday, the lack of action by DFO to protect Mi'kmaw fishermen could undermine any progress made.

"Unfortunately, if DFO doesn't act and remove commercial fishermen from the water from interfering with our rights, the conversation will end," he said. "We're not going to continue to talk to move forward if they're not willing to protect us and to uphold our treaty right."

Lobster for sale

In Halifax, Sipekne'katik band member Cheryl Maloney sold about 50 kilograms of Mi'kmaw-harvested lobster on the sidewalk Friday outside Province House — a location she chose because she said it was time for the provincial government to step in to help resolve the dispute.

Since the launch of Sipekne'katik's moderate livelihood fishery, Premier Stephen McNeil has said the issue falls exclusively under federal jurisdiction. Maloney, however, argues the province needs to amend a provincial regulation that says it's only legal to buy fish caught by someone with a federal commercial licence.

Maloney sold out in about an hour, with one woman paying $60 for a single lobster as a show of support.

Sack, however, said he did not sanction the sale, fearing it might hamper or reverse the fishery's progress.

'This community is out of hand'

The vice-president of a fishermen's union in Nova Scotia stepped down Friday, citing fears for his family's safety as threats from some non-Indigenous fishermen opposed to a self-regulated Mi'kmaw lobster fishery continue to escalate.

Joel Comeau, a former member of the Local 9 of the Maritime Fishermen's Union, was supposed to meet with Sack on Friday morning but abruptly cancelled the meeting.

Joel Comeau said Friday that he's stepping down from his position with Local 9 of the Maritime Fishermen's Union after four years. (Olivier Lefebvre)

Comeau said he's received "a lot of flak from my people and a lot of intimidation" over his willingness to work with Sack to find a way forward.

"I've been followed right to my house with my family in the truck at seven o'clock in the morning and people with tinted windows sitting across my driveway, you know, intimidating me and some language that I probably can't use on the air," Comeau told CBC's Maritime Noon Friday.

He said one of his friends and his friend's young daughter had to be escorted out of a restaurant by police on Thursday.

"This community is out of hand. This community feels unsafe," said Comeau.

This screenshot from a video posted to Facebook shows a man grabbing and shoving Chief Mike Sack during an altercation this week. (Facebook)

Commercial fishermen are angry the fishery is operating outside the federally mandated commercial season, while the Mi'kmaq say they're simply exercising their treaty rights and that their small-scale fishery would not have a negative effect on lobster stocks.

Even after the events of this week, Comeau and Sack shared a message of calm and committed to sitting down together to talk.

Their exchange about the need for commercial and Mi'kmaw fishermen to work together was caught on video Wednesday.

Sack said he has a lot of respect for Comeau and was disappointed to hear that he'd resigned.

"For them to turn on their own people like that, it should be a clear indication for Canada what we're going through, and we're outsiders so it's 10 times worse for us," Sack said.

Mainstreet NS 0:00 Sipekne'katik chief and commercial fisherman call for peaceful and constructive dialogue Joel Comeau, a third generation lobster fisherman from Meteghan, and Mike Sack, chief of Sipekne'katik First Nation, join host Jeff Douglas to talk about the way forward after this week's vandalism and violence in southwest Nova Scotia. 0:00

Comeau said he presented a woven basket with tobacco to an elder at the Saulnierville Wharf on Treaty Day and was looking forward to continuing his conversation with Sack.

"It is a shame that it's not going to happen, and the fishermen felt that I was betraying them and that I was going behind their backs," he said.

He said he places the blame for what's happening in southwest Nova Scotia squarely on the shoulders of Bernadette Jordan and the inaction of DFO officials.

Jordan said Thursday she is in negotiations with the Sipekne'katik First Nation and talking to commercial fishermen.

Comeau said that while commercial fishermen will have to find someone else to fight on their behalf, he also understands their anger and knows where it's coming from.

"There's no divide. The fishermen are united. The coalition is united," he said. "The divide is with me and my family and my family is number one, so you're not able to twist this to be blaming anybody. Every organization is working 120 per cent on this file. Everybody wants answers."

MORE TOP STORIESIn the wake of attacks against a First Nation’s fishery in southeastern Nova Scotia, questions are being raised about a lack of RCMP enforcement — which many say might have nipped the conflict in the bud.

On Thursday, Sipekne’katik Chief Mike Sack sent a message to Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, asking him to send more law enforcement to the area to quell the conflict and counter actions he has described as hate crimes.

“This truly is systemic racism,” Sack said. “Does Trudeau care about our people? Does he care about reconciliation? They talk about it, but I don’t see any actions toward it.”

Two days earlier, about 200 men descended at different times on a pair of lobster-storage sites being used by the Sipekne’katik First Nation for the moderate livelihood lobster fishery it has undertaken.

The fishery has been launched in the face of opposition from non-Indigenous fishers and long-unresolved negotiations with the federal government over what constitutes a “moderate livelihood.”

At the first site, in New Edinburgh, police reported seeing a van set afire, and people throwing rocks and causing damage to the building and vehicles. At the second, in nearby Middle West Pubnico, the mob trapped a Sipekne’katik fisher inside, hurling rocks and racial taunts until the man was forced to leave without the lobster he’d caught that day. RCMP reportedly advised the fisherman he would have to leave.

No charges have been laid in the incidents.

The actions follow reports of Indigenous lobster lines being cut, traps being pulled up and, in one case, a fishing boat set ablaze when the Sipekne’katik launched its fishery weeks earlier.

No charges have been laid in those instances, either.

The Sipekne’katik chief said he’s been forestalling calls to bring in Indigenous warriors from across the country to take up enforcement in a situation where he believes both the Department of Fisheries and Oceans and the RCMP have been lacking.

“My belief is that everything could have been a lot safer if the DFO acted in the first place, and some of those commercial fishermen were held accountable and charged for their actions,” he said.

“(They’re) believing that they can do whatever they want, and get away with it and take the law into their own hands. And I’m starting to believe that’s true.”

He said the band is in the process of pursuing lawsuits against those who are interfering with its fishery.

RCMP Sgt. Andrew Joyce, meanwhile, said the immediate priority for the police force in the dispute has been to prevent loss of life.

“As a police force, we come to an incident and we’re severely outnumbered. You have 200 or so individuals who have high emotion to an issue, and are confronting another, smaller group of individuals. Our main goal here is the protection of life,” he said.

“We’re trying to make sure nobody is grievously hurt, or worse. We recognize that during this incident, that that there was criminal behaviour. It was being videoed. We understand all that.”

But Joyce said, under those circumstances each arrest would have taken two officers away from a situation in which they were already outnumbered. He also said that the fact that no charges have been laid as yet does not preclude charges for those incidents being laid in the future.

“There are there are some out there who feel that the police response was inadequate. (That) we didn’t do a good job. That’s their right to say that, and I respect them for saying that,” he said.

“A lot of those emotions come from either interactions or frustration over this specific issue of where it is going. And I can’t say this enough. This issue, I’m no expert on. But I do know it is not a police issue. I think we’ll all agree to that.”

The Sipekne’katik cite a Supreme Court of Canada decision in 1999 that acknowledge their treaty right to fish for a modest livelihood. Non-Indigenous fishermen argue that they are opposed to the band’s decision to start a commercial lobster fishing business that is operating outside the federally regulated lobster season.

Colin Sproul, head of the Bay of Fundy Inshore Fishermen’s Association, said he condemns the violence but added it is the product of years of growing concern about the state of the stocks.

Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading... Loading...

“We’re Canadians. We should expect that dialogue is always the way to solve our problems, not through violence,” he said.

He also criticized the Mounties for failing to take action against any of the parties to the dispute. He said he was dumbfounded a few weeks ago when he saw Indigenous fishers trying to board a non-Indigenous boat in St. Mary’s Bay while an RCMP tactical squad observed.

“I can accept that Indigenous people may have seen acts of violence perpetrated against them that the RCMP walked away from, too,” he said.

In Ottawa, Minister of Indigenous Services Marc Miller said he found the images of Tuesday night’s violence alarming.

“We’re talking about a fundamental right to earn a moderate livelihood, that is a right the Mi’kmaq are entitled to exercise,” Miller said. He noted that “moderate livelihood” has never been defined in a way that’s acceptable to all sides and said non-Indigenous fishers need be involved in the discussion.

“The risk, if we don’t get this right, is that people will die. ... Violence begets violence, and that is unacceptable,” he said.

Following a cabinet meeting Thursday, Nova Scotia Premier Stephen McNeil said he was “extremely disappointed” by the federal response to date around the Indigenous lobster fishery. McNeil said Ottawa needs to find a workable solution by sitting down with all sides in the dispute as soon as possible.

“This is only getting more entrenched ... they need to be in the same room so everyone knows what each other is saying,” he said.

McNeil also said the province would provide police with the “resources necessary,” including manpower to ensure public safety in the area. “If more people are required, we obviously would have to pick up that bill,” he said.

Provincial Justice Minister Mark Furey said he was satisfied with the RCMP response, adding that he thought it’s been a “measured approach” under difficult circumstances.

Sack said during the news conference the Mi’kmaq fishery will continue despite the damage done to the holding facilities, the burning of one fisherman’s boat and damage to vehicles in recent weeks.

He said the band is now in the process of purchasing the damaged plant in New Edinburgh, which he said would include a buyer’s licence if the sale is completed. “It’s just a matter of doing the paperwork,” he said.

With files from The Canadian Press.

Read more about: