TORONTO -- Canadian retail giant Loblaw is launching a new health and wellness app in Atlantic Canada that will eventually be available nationwide and include virtual physician care and a digital pharmacy.

Atlantic Canadians can log on to the PC Health app to get guidance from registered nurses and dietitians via live chat, as well as set and track personal health goals. Completing daily goals and activities can earn PC Optimum loyalty points for users.

"Our company's purpose is to help Canadians live life well and the PC Health app is an innovative and powerful new tool that we really think brings this to life," said Jeff Leger, president of the Loblaw-owned Shoppers Drug Mart.

"This app combines our company's expertise – health and wellness advice, nutrition, and rewards – into a healthcare solution for Canadians that can live right at their fingertips."

The app will include “care navigators” who will guide users to finding the support they need, including dentists, family doctors or an after-hours walk-in clinic, along with educational content and activities that are tied to a user’s goals.

The app is powered by technology developed by League, a Chicago-based health enterprise provider.

"The healthcare system is a complex web of information, providers, and insurers,” Michael Serbinis, the company’s founder and CEO, said in a press release. “The PC Health app will help address these issues and provide a new personalized ‘front door’ to healthcare.”

Another points-driven wellness app, Carrot Rewards, that received millions in government funding, shut down in June 2019. Users could choose from about half a dozen points providers and were rewarded for physical activity and engaging with government-approved health messages.

The federal government invested $5 million in the Toronto-based developer Carrot Insights, with B.C. pitching in $2 million and Ontario $1.5 million. Newfoundland and Labrador and the Northwest Territories also supported the app.

In January, Toronto-based corporate wellness provider Optimity bought Carrot Rewards, which had a user base of more than 1.1 million people.U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officers at the Port of Buffalo seized more than a tonne of cannabis in a commercial shipment this week coming in from Canada.

This is the most recent in a string of large seizures since the border was closed to all but essential traffic in the wake of the global pandemic.

On October 15, CBP officers discovered 2,145 vacuum-sealed one pound packages of cannabis in a commercial shipment of 20 pallets during the internal inspection. It was also determined that the marijuana had an estimated street value of more than $8 million dollars, at a value of about $5 a gram.

US border authorities now say they have captured more than 40,000 pounds of cannabis coming in from Canada since last October, valued at nearly $100 million US.

Both US and Canadian authorities have intercepted numerous large cannabis shipments at or destined for the US border since the two countries closed their border to all non essential traffic in March due to the global pandemic. The bulk of seized shipments has been since the border closure in March.

“Our CBP officers remain enforcement focused and driven and this latest large load marijuana seizure is proof of that”, said Port Director Jennifer De La O. “Their efforts have produced record setting results for narcotics seizures within the Buffalo Field Office exemplifying their dedication to the CBP mission.”