Party leaders' responses to a question about white privilege in this week's B.C. election debate have left some observers with big questions about a lack of understanding on issues of racism.

During Tuesday's debate, the leaders were asked to explain how they've reckoned with their own privileged positions as white people.

In one of the most talked about moments of the night, NDP Leader John Horgan spoke of playing lacrosse with Indigenous young people and suggested, "I did not see colour."

June Francis, co-chair of the Hogan's Alley Society board of directors, described that answer as "stunning" in light of this summer's protests over anti-Black racism, and said it demonstrates the depth of Horgan's privilege.

"It means that he can walk through the world and never confront racism," she told CBC.

WATCH | NDP Leader John Horgan says he regrets hurting people with comments:

NDP Leader John Horgan apologizes for race comment made during debate 1:03 John Horgan says he regrets saying he didn't see colour growing up on Vancouver Island when asked about how he's reckoning with his white privilege. Horgan says he's promising to do better in the future. 1:03

Francis said that as premier, it was Horgan's job to govern on behalf of everyone who lives in B.C., and if he's blind to race, he's also blind to the systemic racism that many British Columbians live with.

Horgan apologized for his comment immediately after the debate, calling it inappropriate and saying, "I'll never fully understand, as a white person, the lived reality of systemic racism. I'm listening, learning and I'll keep working every day to do better."

This is the answer I wish I gave on stage. Saying "I don’t see colour" causes pain and makes people feel unseen. I’m sorry. I’ll never fully understand, as a white person, the lived reality of systemic racism. I’m listening, learning, and I’ll keep working every day to do better. <a href="https://t.co/Rbr7h0JOyh">pic.twitter.com/Rbr7h0JOyh</a> —@jjhorgan

But for Genevieve Fuji Johnson, a political science professor at Simon Fraser University, that apology suggests Horgan still doesn't quite understand the issue.

"So often, colour blindness is synonymous for words like neutral and fair, and to make the suggestion that beliefs and behaviours and laws and policies and institutions are neutral or fair just totally glosses over the myriad of forms of oppression and indeed violence that racialized people and minorities face at the hands of supposedly neutral laws and institutions," she said.

Liberal Leader Andrew Wilkinson's answer to the same question was also troubling for some of those who watched the debate. In his response, the Liberal leader told a story about working as a doctor and delivering an Indigenous baby who was later named after him.

Francis said Wilkinson's answer didn't show any engagement with the issues that Indigenous people face in B.C.

"Instead, he told this story about himself and how glorious his experience was," she said. "It was deeply troubling, actually."

Wilkinson expanded on his comments Wednesday at a campaign stop in Kitimat, on B.C.'s North Coast.



"In medical practice, I became very much aware of the particular struggles of Indigenous people in dealing with the health-care system and in dealing with society's other structures,'' Wilkinson said. "The idea that people in our society are somehow treated differently because of the colour of their skin or where they grew up or who their parents are is not acceptable.''

He said he grew up fortunate as a white male and it wasn't until his teenage years that he realized he received different treatment than others.



"It's wrong. It's not fair,'' said Wilkinson. "I've suggested in the [Liberal] platform there should be anti-racism training for everybody in the provincial government.''

From right, NDP Leader John Horgan, Green Leader Sonia Furstenau and Liberal Leader Andrew Wilkinson are shown preparing for Tuesday's debate. (Jonathan Hayward/The Canadian Press)

Green Party Leader Sonia Furstenau's response during the debate earned praise from some corners. Furstenau acknowledged the existence of systemic racism in the criminal justice system.

"We aren't all equal. I wish we were, but we're not," she said.

Francis said that answer was "fantastic" but that she remains concerned about the lack of diversity among Green Party candidates.

Fuji Johnson, on the other hand, said Furstenau missed an opportunity to discuss how systemic racism is pervasive in all Canadian institutions, from health care to education.

"I gave her a C, maybe a C+. I would say her response was adequate," Fuji Johnson said.

Indigenous issues missing from debate

Meanwhile, there were some other concerns about the debate's lack of focus on issues that matter to Indigenous communities.

CBC journalist Wawmeesh Hamilton pointed out that the only mention of reconciliation came during discussion of energy projects.

"I began to wonder, with no mention of it, if we reconciled. ... Did I miss something?" he said.

There was also nothing about the unique concerns of urban Indigenous people, who represent the majority of the Indigenous population in B.C.

CBC journalist Wawmeesh Hamilton says reconciliation should have been a major focus in the B.C. leaders' debate. (Ben Nelms/CBC)

In a similar vein, the Coalition on Murdered and Missing Indigenous Women and Girls in B.C. released an open letter Wednesday expressing "grave concern and disappointment" that none of the parties have released plans to implement the Calls for Justice of the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls.

Hamilton argued that the debate should have had an entire section devoted to the question of reconciliation. But as he noted, no Indigenous journalists were included on the panel that drafted questions for the party leaders.

"A step back was taken where reconciliation and Indigenous issues were concerned," he said. "Some soul searching needs to be done, stock should be taken and corrections need to be made."

For more stories about the experiences of Black Canadians — from anti-Black racism to success stories within the Black community — check out Being Black in Canada, a CBC project Black Canadians can be proud of. You can read more stories here.Two years after Canada legalized recreational cannabis, the country is awash with the stuff.

Hundreds of thousands of kilograms of cannabis sit idle in producers' vaults. Warehouses operated by provincial wholesalers are filled to the brim with finished products. Meanwhile, illicit growers remain active and add to a country-wide stockpile that is far outpacing market demand.

The mountain of pot is expected to balloon further once producers – both legal and illicit – finish their "Croptober" harvest, the term used within the cannabis industry in reference to the period around October when outdoor cannabis crops are chopped down and processed.

"There has been too much cultivation in Canada," said Rahul Sarugaser, managing director of equity research at Raymond James, in a phone interview. "But that is secondary to the fact that there have been too many players and as a result, there's too much competition in the market."

There are 507 producers that Health Canada has licensed to grow cannabis legally, with roughly 60 of them selling into the recreational market. That's created a market where there are 45 million packaged cannabis products held by cultivators, processors, distributors, and retailers across the country, roughly four-and-a-half times the amount being sold in June, according to recent Health Canada figures.

That supply imbalance is causing major headaches for the industry.

More than a dozen cannabis companies have filed for creditor protection and major producers like Canopy Growth Corp. and Aurora Cannabis Inc. have written down billions of dollars in inventory and assets. Meanwhile, industry woes accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic have led to hundreds of layoffs. Even the eagerly-anticipated "Cannabis 2.0" rollout of vapes and edible products was met with early delays and launch stumbles.

Sarugaser expects the supply glut to ease in the coming years as companies that aren't able to produce cannabis in an economically viable manner fade away.

"There are big names that maintain the largest market share that produce negative gross margins quarter-over-quarter. That's simply not a way to run a business," he said.

There have been some notable successes, however, with spending in the legal recreational and medical cannabis market now eclipsing the illicit market, according to recent figures from Statistics Canada. Total sales have risen steadily each month and the Canadian market is currently forecasted to produce annual sales of about $2.8 billion.

Retail is also turning a corner after a myriad of stumbles in the first year, notably in Ontario. The country's most populous province now counts 200 stores open and is adding 40 new shops a month, while there are more than 1,200 licensed pot shops available nationwide.

Even the illicit market has found itself in the crosshairs of nationwide police investigations that seized hundreds of thousands of cannabis plants over the past year, including a recent bust in August where $42 million worth of illegally-grown pot was captured in Ontario’s Niagara region.

Combating the illicit market has not been an easy task, but some producers are going toe-to-toe with their unregulated counterparts, growing cannabis for less than $1 per gram while others have turned to the great outdoors to produce it for pennies. More than 1,200 acres of land is being used to grow outdoor cannabis this year, more than twice as much as last year, according to Health Canada.

"How else do you beat the black market? You do what they do," Geoff Benic, chief executive officer of Aleafia Health Inc., told BNN Bloomberg as he stood in the middle of the company's property outside of Toronto where 50,000 cannabis plants would soon be harvested.

"You play their game, just with more sophistication."

To prepare for their harvest, Aleafia’s staff was busy earlier this month strategizing over PowerPoint presentations while other workers put the finishing touches on a 35,000-square-foot dry room complete with a customized ventilation system that would soon host some of the company's crop.

Aleafia Health has planted more than 50,000 cannabis plants across its property in Port Perry, Ont. in an attempt to produce cheap pot to help combat the illicit market. (Photo courtesy of Aleafia Health)

Benic allayed concerns that the company was only adding to the existing glut of cannabis in the market, noting that a good chunk of the plants grown at Aleafia's facility contain high levels of cannabidiol (CBD), the non-impairing chemical compound used to treat pain and inflammation. It's part of a bet he made that Canada would soon deregulate CBD for over-the-counter products and eventually allow exports to foreign markets. When that day comes, the company will have plenty of products to meet demand.

"I truly believe that CBD will be no different than what Omega-3 is to eggs," Benic said.

John Fowler, principal of consultancy Blaise Ventures and founder of Supreme Cannabis Co., argues that companies shouldn't be blamed for growing too much cannabis. Instead, he said producers didn't do enough research to understand what products consumers wanted in the first place.

"There are companies out there that have inventory that they can't sell, that they're producing, and are actively buying other inventory that they sell, which means there's a mismatch between their production and what their customers want to buy," he said.

While production doesn't appear to be slowing down, next year should bring some optimism to the beleaguered sector

Raymond James' Sarugaser expects growth to continue in the space, propelled by ongoing cannabis store openings and more familiarity with new products that should hit the market.

"We're starting to see a loosening up of the markets," he said. "We're seeing an opening up of retail, we're seeing the value segment drive top line revenue for the good operators, and then we should see the eventual adoption of Cannabis 2.0 products into 2021."​