The Ford government has announced that York Region will join Toronto, Peel, and Ottawa as the latest district to revert back to modified Stage 2 restrictions.

The government says these modified Stage 2 restrictions will be enforced for a minimum of 28 days and reviewed afterwards.

The new guidelines will become effective starting at 12:01 a.m. on Monday, Oct. 19 and include restricting indoor dining and closing indoor gyms, casinos, cinemas, and interactive exhibits.

“The indicators are going in the wrong direction,” Ford said.

“We’re seeing a rapid increase in the rate of infection with the positivity rate of 2.77 per cent, above the high alert threshold of 2.5 per cent. Cases per 100,000 in York are now nearly 39; well, well above the provincial average,” the Premier added.

What will close:

Indoor gyms and fitness centres (yoga studios, dance studios)

Casinos, bingo halls and other gaming establishments

Cinemas

Performing arts centres and venues

Spectator areas in racing venues

Interactive exhibits or exhibits with high risk of personal contact in museums,

galleries, zoos, science centres, landmarks, etc.

Prohibiting personal care services where face coverings must be removed for the service

Ford and Minister of Health, Christine Elliott, both acknowledge the decision did not come easy.

“We need to act now,” Elliott said on Friday.

Elliot says infection rates in York are going in the wrong direction and that we need to act fast after a jump in the numbers, adding this is about preventing something much worse down the road.

“I say this as a member from York Region, however, this is how fast this pandemic is progressing through its second wave,” Elliott added.

STATEMENT – York Region to move to modified Stage 2 on Monday at 12:01AM. #Covid19 #topoli #onpoli pic.twitter.com/1NHn9MghJf — Mayor Frank Scarpitti (@frankscarpitti) October 16, 2020

Prior to Friday’s announcement, Ontario’s Premier said York has been “teetering”, going on to say the region’s trajectory has been concerning for government and health officials.

York Region saw a substantial increase of 127 COVID-19 cases on Thursday, but reported a drop on Friday, with 62 new cases.

Halton – another region that could eventually rejoin York, Peel, Toronto, and Ottawa in Stage 2 – reported 46 new COVID-19 cases today; up from 28 new infections logged on Thursday.TORONTO -- Canadian retail giant Loblaw is launching a new health and wellness app in Atlantic Canada that will eventually be available nationwide and include virtual physician care and a digital pharmacy.

Atlantic Canadians can log on to the PC Health app to get guidance from registered nurses and dietitians via live chat, as well as set and track personal health goals. Completing daily goals and activities can earn PC Optimum loyalty points for users.

"Our company's purpose is to help Canadians live life well and the PC Health app is an innovative and powerful new tool that we really think brings this to life," said Jeff Leger, president of the Loblaw-owned Shoppers Drug Mart.

"This app combines our company's expertise – health and wellness advice, nutrition, and rewards – into a healthcare solution for Canadians that can live right at their fingertips."

The app will include “care navigators” who will guide users to finding the support they need, including dentists, family doctors or an after-hours walk-in clinic, along with educational content and activities that are tied to a user’s goals.

The app is powered by technology developed by League, a Chicago-based health enterprise provider.

"The healthcare system is a complex web of information, providers, and insurers,” Michael Serbinis, the company’s founder and CEO, said in a press release. “The PC Health app will help address these issues and provide a new personalized ‘front door’ to healthcare.”

Another points-driven wellness app, Carrot Rewards, that received millions in government funding, shut down in June 2019. Users could choose from about half a dozen points providers and were rewarded for physical activity and engaging with government-approved health messages.

The federal government invested $5 million in the Toronto-based developer Carrot Insights, with B.C. pitching in $2 million and Ontario $1.5 million. Newfoundland and Labrador and the Northwest Territories also supported the app.

In January, Toronto-based corporate wellness provider Optimity bought Carrot Rewards, which had a user base of more than 1.1 million people.