Sean Kilpatrick/The Canadian Press Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Chrystia Freeland hold a press conference in Ottawa, July 16, 2020. Canada has run up the largest deficit of any G20 country during the pandemic, and by a wide margin.

Canada’s government deficit has ballooned by the most of any major country during the COVID-19 pandemic by a wide margin ― but in the short run at least, that might be a good thing, a new report says. Canada’s deficit this year will amount to nearly one-fifth (19.6 per cent) of the country’s economic output, according to an analysis at National Bank Financial. That’s well ahead of the second-place United Kingdom, which is on track for a deficit equal to 14.6 per cent of its economy.

National Bank of Canada Financial Markets

The federal government’s deficit is headed for $330 billion this fiscal year, the Parliamentary Budget Office says. “Put more positively, this also implies that no other country has provided as much fiscal support for the economic recovery as Canada has,” NBF economists Warren Lovely, Taylor Schleich and Jocelyn Paquet wrote in a report this week. “We’re already seeing some benefits here. The recovery in Canada’s labour market by nearly all measurements has been much stronger than in the U.S., where fiscal uncertainty and inaction has provided a headwind in recent months.”Crowds will rally to protest social distancing, quarantines, travel bans, and contact tracing related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic

What saw several hundreds of protestors converge at the Vancouver Art Gallery without masks last month during a pandemic is poised for a second life this weekend.

Thousands of anti-mask advocates plan to gather at the “B.C. Freedom Mega Rally” Saturday and Sunday – and not just demonstrators from the Metro Vancouver area.

Anti-mask and anti-vaccine advocates, 5G and QAnon conspiracy theorists, and far-right groups have expanded the protest call to citizens from all across the province.

Spanning over the course of two days, the rally is expected to be the “biggest rally ever in British Columbia and Western Canada,” according to lead organizer Ryan Kulbuba.





This time around, Kulbuba is coordinating car convoys for protestors travelling into Vancouver for the large-scale demonstration.

Kulbuba said the city has become a hub for Canadians to protest COVID-19 regulations including social distancing, quarantine, travel bans, and contact tracing.

During the last rally on Sept. 13, Kulbuba lauded the Vancouver Police Department (VPD) for preserving the group’s “right to protest.”

"They have been nothing but accommodating to us. They are here for our safety," he said.

Police presence expected

Though the VPD then had the ability to impose fines of up to $2,000 for those not adhering to a provincial health ban on events with more than 50 people – no tickets were doled out to organizers or those gathered without social distancing measures.

Kulbuba added that the VPD is aware of the thousands of protestors expected this weekend.

VPD spokesperson Cst. Tania Visintin told Vancouver Is Awesome the force is aware of the rally planned.

"Public safety is our number one concern. We'll be there should anything arise," she said.

The lineup of speakers includes discredited virologist Dr. Judy Mikovitz, homeopathic practitioner Dr. Robert Scott Bell, and alternative medicine practitioner Dr. Rashid Buttar.

Currently, no law forces vaccinations or face masks on B.C. citizens.