CAUTION: This story contains graphic content related to allegations of sexual assault and might be upsetting to some readers.

If you or someone you know are victims of sexual violence, you can contact Crisis Services Canada, a 24/7 hotline, at 1-833-456-4566 or you can find local support through the Ontario Coalition of Rape Crisis Centres; The Government of Canada has also compiled a list of sexual misconduct support centres. If you are under 18 and need help, contact the Kid’s Help Phone online or at 1-800-668-6868.

It took Peter Luci nearly 30 years to find the strength to confront the Catholic Priest he tells us raped him as a teen – and when he finally did – his alleged abuser, Father Leo Campbell, mysteriously died.

“He was surrounded by boys and I couldn’t believe it. I was just beside myself.”

A chance encounter with Fr. Campell at a friend’s wedding spurred Luci to finally open up about the trauma he says he endured as a 15-year-old, decades earlier.

“I never expected to see him that night,” says Luci. “He was surrounded by boys and I couldn’t believe it. I was just beside myself.”

“I went up to him and I said, ‘Remember me?’ and it was like in one of those movies. He took a step back, three steps and started to tremble. He did remember me. There was no doubt, it was obvious, but he denied it.”

Luci says he was overcome with guilt and anger when he saw Fr. Campbell surrounded by children. He felt that his silence about his own alleged abuse enabled a man he saw as a predator to access more potential victims.

The face-to-face encounter led Luci to finally tell his wife about the abuse he says he endured when he was a student at St. Mary’s College, a high school in Sault Ste. Marie run by an order of Catholic Priests known as the Basilians.

“It escalated to the point where he was raping me.”

“I knew it wasn’t right. But I didn’t know who to turn to or what to do,” says Luci. “It escalated to the point where he was raping me.”

“He’d ejaculate in my mouth, he’d ejaculate outside my mouth. He’d have a towel, or he’d clean it up afterwards. And it progressed.”

In the mid-2000s, Luci joined a sex abuse survivors’ support group, which led him to psychotherapist Lynne MacDonell, who has treated hundreds of men who are victims of abuse.

“It takes so much courage to come forward,” says MacDonell. “Men who come forward look back on that and they don’t see themselves as boys – they’re adult men [asking,] ‘Why did I let that happen to me?’ They’re full of shame, they’re full of remorse, they’re blaming themselves.”

As younger survivors began to join Luci’s support group, Luci told MacDonell he still felt guilty that he never came forward as a victim.

“He said he felt that if he didn’t come forward and later found out that another boy was being abused, he would be to blame,” MacDonell explains.

In early January 2008 – years after the encounter at the wedding — MacDonell brought Luci’s claims to the Basilians, whose headquarters are in Toronto. The order of priests told her they take all allegations of abuse seriously and arranged to investigate.

On January 30, a Basilian Father took Luci’s statement, noting “obviously he has suffered trauma that still affects him in a significant way.” On the same day, the priest interviewed Fr. Campbell, who at the time was 68 years old and retired from teaching.

Fr. Campbell told the investigator he didn’t remember Luci, and categorically denied that any abuse took place. The investigating priest also asked Fr. Campbell if he was attracted to young men. After hesitating he answered “yes, but more as a father-son relationship, not sexually.”

As the interview wrapped up, the Basilian investigator noted that Fr. Campbell appeared depressed and he was “concerned about how this would impact his future as a priest.”

On February 11, the Basilian investigator submitted his report to the order’s leader. In it, he stated he found Luci’s allegations to be credible and recommended that Fr. Campbell be sent for another mental health assessment.

CityNews reached out to the Basilians multiple times, asking for an interview with one of their most senior priests, Vicar General, David Katulski. Our requests were denied. Eventually, we sent a detailed list of questions for an official response. The order declined to answer questions about specific individuals or events. Their lawyer did forward a statement.

“There has never been any doubt or misunderstanding that sexual abuse of a child is, and always has been, wrong,” the Basilians write.

The statement says historically, attraction to children wasn’t well understood, which contributed to the thinking that sex abuse “was a moral failing, and could be addressed by deeper spiritual focus and commitment.”

“Treatment providers often treated those against whom allegations of sexual abuse had been made and, believing them to be cured, cleared them to return to work.”

The mystery of Fr. Campbell’s death

Three days later, Luci received a bombshell phone call – Fr. Campbell had died.

Luci says he asked about the circumstances of Fr. Campbell’s death, but was never given details. His death was described as a “sudden passing” in a memorial in the alumni newsletter of St. Michael’s College School. Despite allegations that began to pile up early in his career, Fr. Campbell was still appointed principal of the Basilian-run private school in Toronto and later brought back as head of chaplaincy and to teach religion.

MacDonell believes that understanding how Fr. Campbell died would help Luci gain some measure of peace.

“It would have helped him so much,” she says.

The priest’s death brought Luci conflicting emotions.

“I felt responsible for his death, and that was when I started to see him coming to me, in my head when I fall asleep,” he says. “He’s not there to see what he did to me and others. He’s not there, he’s just gone. I’m here though and I have to live with what he did. That’s not fair.”

The Basilians tell CityNews that Fr. Campbell died of heart failure. In his obituary posted in the Basilian Newsletter, Fr. Campbell was remembered as a priest who “had a special ability to reach out to the disenfranchised and alienated.”

His funeral was held at Holy Rosary Church, where he had once served as associate pastor. His colleague, Fr. John Malo, gave his eulogy, and Campbell is buried in the Basilian plot at Holy Cross Cemetery in Thornhill.

In the months following his death, St. Michael’s College established a bursary, “in honour and memory of Fr. Leo Campbell, whose musical talents and contributions to the St. Michael’s community are missed.”

The Basilians also began paying for Luci’s psychotherapy.

In 2009, Luci filed a lawsuit against Fr. Campbell’s estate and the Basilians. It was settled in 2015 for $250,000, and without any admission of liability from the order of priests.

When St. Mike’s became aware of the settlement, the school took Fr. Campbell’s name off the bursary.

In a statement to CityNews, the school says to the knowledge of current administration, the Basilian Fathers didn’t tell school administration about the allegations against Fr. Campbell while he was teaching there.

Luci is adamant that, for him, coming forward was about coming to terms with what he says happened to him.

“There’s no balance left after that, everything’s thrown into chaos.”

“It destroyed all my life. All aspects. My wife. Our sex life. Everything,” he says. “Just now after all the years and after all this help, I’ve started to feel strong enough to be able to talk.”

If you or someone you know are victims of sexual violence, you can contact Crisis Services Canada, a 24/7 hotline, at 1-833-456-4566 or you can find local support through the Ontario Coalition of Rape Crisis Centres; The Government of Canada has also compiled a list of sexual misconduct support centres. If you are under 18 and need help, contact the Kid’s Help Phone online or at 1-800-668-6868.Three people have received presumptive positive COVID-19 test results in the Northwest Territories, and health officials are warning of potential exposure to the disease in Yellowknife.

One person is from Inuvik while the other two are from Yellowknife, according to a news release issued Friday morning from N.W.T.'s office of the chief public health officer.

The cases between jurisdictions are unrelated, the release says. However the cases in Yellowknife are connected — one person travelled from within Canada, arriving by air, and subsequently transmitted it to a household member. The release says the tests came late Thursday night and an investigation is underway.

"There are some contacts that we're reaching out to to provide the advice they need," said Dr. Andy Delli-Pizzi, the territory's deputy chief public health officer, at a news conference Friday.

"I want to ensure residents across our territory, that today we are safe," he said.

"By moving quickly, we can minimize the risk of an outbreak."

Delli-Pizzi said he knows many are wondering whether this will mean a change to public health orders or a transition back to an earlier phase of the territory's reopening plan. But he said at this time, the situation is manageable and there's no need to alter the government's overall approach.

Yellowknife's Anytime Fitness was identified as one location of possible exposure. (Michael Hugall/CBC)

Exposure risk

During the briefing, Delli-Pizzi said there are two places with risk of exposure from one of the Yellowknife cases.

Anyone who was at Anytime Fitness in Yellowknife on Oct. 12 between 3 and 4:30 p.m. as well as anyone who was in the RCMP Yellowknife Detachment public waiting area on Oct. 13 between 11 and 11:30 a.m. must self-isolate at home for the next 14 days, and monitor for symptoms closely.

As well, people who were in those risk areas must contact the Yellowknife Public Health Unit at 867-767-9120 to get additional advice.

People you live with must also self-isolate for 14 days if you cannot safely self-isolate at home away from them, the release says.

"If you develop any of the following symptoms, no matter how mild, we are asking you contact the Yellowknife Public Health Unit to be assessed," the release states.

Symptoms include fever, new or worsening cough, shortness of breath, malaise (generally feeling unwell) and muscle aches. Other symptoms could include fatigue, sore throat, runny nose, headache, diarrhea, vomiting, loss of sense of smell or taste and loss of appetite.

The territory says it's opening the Yellowknife drive-thru COVID-19 testing clinic from 12 to 4 p.m. this weekend to respond to additional testing demand.

On Facebook, Anytime Fitness in Yellowknife shared the advisory with a short statement.

"We want to extend our well wishes to the infected individuals in the N.W.T during this time, we wish them a speedy recovery," it reads.

The gym currently requires clients to pre-book visits using an app.

"Anyone who was in the gym during that time is being contacted today by our team and given instructions on what to do next," the post reads.

"Public Health has confirmed that it is safe to remain open at this time as we do have proper social distancing measures in place."

Delli-Pizzi said the territory is being "extra precautionary." He added the risk of exposure at the gym is "not very high, but it's also not negligible."

"Typically there's no need to shut down a facility based on this," he said.

The RCMP also released a statement Friday evening saying services would continue uninterrupted.

"Front counter staff limit the number of persons admitted to the entrance area, and have preventative measures available including masks and hand sanitizer," the release reads.

Liquor stores in Yellowknife introduced mask policies in light of the news. (Sara Minogue/CBC)

Low risk from Inuvik case

As for the Inuvik case, the release sent Friday morning says a person started their travel in Alberta, traveled to Inuvik by road and arrived on Oct. 10. The person immediately isolated upon arrival and in accordance with the travel restrictions and self-isolation protocols, it states. The person is still isolating at home and "doing well."

An initial assessment shows there were no potential contacts, though the investigation continues. Risk of further transmission is considered to be very low. The release says there are no concerns for exposure along the person's travel route.

There is believed to be no risk of exposure in any other N.W.T. communities.

The three cases are considered presumptive since there have not yet been enough positive tests completed on the analyzers to be able to declare a case confirmed immediately yet, according to Delli-Pizzi.

Follow-up tests will be done by the territory's partner public health laboratory in Edmonton. The territory hopes to have the results by Saturday.

As of Thursday, the government was reporting a total of 5,736 tests done in the territory with 22 pending. There have been five confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the territory, and all of those people recovered months ago.

N.W.T. Premier Caroline Cochrane, right, speaks at a press conference Friday, Oct. 16 following news that three new presumptive positive cases of COVID-19 had been identified in the territory. Health and Social Services Minister Julie Green watches on. (Mario De Ciccio/Radio-Canada)

Premier: 'Second wave' is here

"The second wave that was anticipated by health officials across Canada in the early days of the pandemic is here," said Premier Caroline Cochrane during the Friday press conference.

"Southern Canada is seeing record levels of cases and it was inevitable that we would eventually see new cases in the Northwest Territories.

"The measures we put in place at the beginning of the pandemic are only going to be effective if everyone does their part. It's critical for residents and communities to remain as diligent as possible more than ever before."

Cochrane spoke alongside Health Minister Julie Green, who urged residents to remain vigilant in their efforts to follow public health orders.

"It's important to remember we won't be risk free until there are widely available treatments or vaccines," she said.

Green added that all three cases were recovering with close monitoring from health authorities.

Missed the press conference? Watch it in full below:

Liquor stores, some businesses make masks mandatory

The Inuvik, Hay River, and Yellowknife liquor stores have all introduced mandatory mask policies in light of the news. In downtown Yellowknife, customers without masks were turned away.

A manager at the store confirmed the sign went up Friday following the news of the presumptive cases.

Three Inuvik businesses owned by the same family as the liquor store also introduced a mask policy. Home Hardware Building Centre, Just Raven' Fabrics and More and Arctic Rim Powersports announced on Facebook that masks are now required. They also asked that no children be brought in.

The Nihtat Gwich'in Council has cancelled all of its scheduled programming after lunch on Friday.

This includes programs at the youth centre and the Inuvik Native Band. They said they will post again once they figure out how to deliver programming in a safe and effective manner.