York Region will join Toronto, Peel and Ottawa in moving into a modified version Stage 2 as it deals with a surge in new COVID-19 cases, Premier Doug Ford said Friday.

The change will take effect at 12:01 a.m. Monday and stay in place for at least 28 days, he said at his daily news conference.

That means that gyms, indoor dining rooms and movie theatres will be closed in the region, which includes Markham, Vaughan and Richmond Hill. But schools, child care centres and places of worship will remain open and must continue following the public health measures in place.

On Thursday, Ford said York region has been "teetering for a while," and that the province is keeping a close eye on the region, calling its numbers "concerning."

But he said the decision was a difficult one to make, given the potential consequences for local businesses.

"I hate doing this," he said. "We just have to stop the spread."

WATCH | Premier Doug Ford explains his decision to move York Region into a modified Stage 2:

York Region moves to modified Stage 2 COVID-19 restrictions 1:44 On Friday, Premier Doug Ford announced that York Region will join Toronto, Peel and Ottawa in moving into a modified version Stage 2 as it deals with a surge in new COVID-19 cases. The change will take effect at 12:01 a.m. on Oct. 19 and stay in place for at least 28 days. 1:44

From Oct. 3 to Oct. 9, York Region's case rate increased by 49 per cent to 38.7 per 100,000 people, which is above the Ontario average, according to the province.

In addition, the number of COVID-19 hospitalizations in the region has doubled over the past week.

The region also saw an increase in its testing positivity rate to 2.77 per cent, which is above the "high alert" threshold of 2.5 per cent.

Meanwhile, Ontario reported another 712 cases of COVID-19 on Friday as the number of people in Ontario hospitals with confirmed cases of the illness continued its slow but steady climb.

Trends in the 'wrong direction'

Health Minister Christine Elliott said that the current trends in the area are "concerning" and that they "required us to take action."

"The trends we've seen in York Region are in the wrong direction," Elliott said. "Numbers have jumped and we need to do everything we can to avoid a very severe second wave."

York Region's chairman and CEO, Wayne Emmerson, and its Medical Officer of Health Dr. Karim Kurji issued a joint statement urging residents to abide by the new rules.

"While this is not the news any of us wanted to hear, it is a grim reminder the virus is still a threat to the 1.2 million people who call York Region home," the pair said in the statement.

"It also serves as a signal we all must continue taking steps to keep each other, our families and our communities safe.

WATCH | Health Minister Christine Elliott on the concerning COVID-19 trends in York Region:

'Concerning trends' in York Region, says Ontario health minister 3:46 York Region moving to modified Stage 2 of COVID-19 restrictions was a decision made after seeing concerning trends and looking at multiple indicators, including community transmission, says Ontario Health Minister Christine Elliott. 3:46

Both the premier and health minister also issued a plea to those living in Halton Region, which has also seen recent increases in new daily cases, to keep following public health guidelines to prevent similar action there.

The daily number of infections remained above the 700 mark all this week, with 807 cases on Monday, 746 on Tuesday, and 721 on Wednesday.

The largest number in today's update — 213 cases — was reported in Toronto, followed by Peel with 135 cases, Ottawa with 108 cases and York Region with 62.

After steadily increasing for more than a week, the seven-day average of new daily cases dropped for a second straight day, and it now sits at about 746.

Ontario confirmed nine new deaths linked to COVID-19 on Friday, taking the province's death toll to 3,031.

The province's labs processed 38,500 tests.

There are 713 more resolved cases taking the provincial total total to 54,004 recovered patients.

Meanwhile, there are 261 people hospitalized as a result of COVID-19. Of this number 67 people are in intensive care units across the province, 36 of them on a ventilator.

Meanwhile, as of today, residents of long-term care homes in three regions where cases have been surging are not allowed to go out for social or personal reasons.

The new restrictions will apply to long-term care homes in Toronto, Peel Region and Ottawa, and will remain in place until further notice.

Federal contact tracers ready to help

On Friday, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said federal contact tracers are ready to help chase down people who might have been exposed to COVID-19.

He says they can make up to 14,000 calls a day, at the request of the provinces and territories.

Quickly following up with people who have been close to someone who tests positive for the illness is seen as essential to containing its spread.

Some jurisdictions, including Toronto, have limited the number of people they will try to reach as new cases have cropped up faster than contact tracers can work.

Province supports production of PPEs

On Friday the province announced it continues to work with businesses and the manufacturing sector to expand production of domestic PPE to ensure preparedness, both now and for the future.

To support the fight against COVID-19, Greenfield Global is investing a total of $75 million at their facility in Johnstown Ontario to produce the medical-grade alcohol critical to making hand sanitizers used by Ontario individuals, families, and front-line workers.

The Ontario government is investing $2.5 million through the Ontario Together Fund in support of this project.

The announcement was made today by MPP Steve Clark and Minister of Municipal Affairs and Housing on behalf of Vic Fedeli, Minister of Economic Development, Job Creation and Trade.

"By working together with these innovative businesses, we are ensuring we are well-prepared for the future as we continue our fight against COVID-19," Fedeli said.James Hobson's lightsaber is not a toy.

The YouTuber and his team at Hacksmith Industries in Kitchener, Ont., have created a hyper-realistic, retractable plasma lightsaber that reaches a scorching heat of 2,200 C.

"That's above the melting point of most metals," Hobson told As It Happens host Carol Off. "It's pretty dangerous."

Hobson and his team unveiled the prototype on their YouTube channel Hacksmith last week. They plan to release a second video Thursday in which they'll use the lightsaber to cut through metal siding, a Stormtrooper mannequin and a steel plate "similar to a bank vault door."

The lightsaber looks stunningly similar to the ones made famous in the Star Wars universe. And just like the iconic Jedi sword, the blade is a plasma beam that can retract and extend at the touch of a button.

That beam is generated with liquid propane gas and oxygen gas "mixed in a really fancy laminar flow gas nozzle" — a technology used to control the flow of water in jumping fountains.

"The beam is very straight and narrow, whereas if you were to just light propane on fire, you're going to get a flamethrower effect, like you'd see inside of a barbecue," Hobson said.

"But because we're using this very fancy laminar flow nozzle, we're able to get the solid-looking beam of white-hot fire, basically."

Hacksmith Industries' lightsaber prototype can change colours using different additives. (The Hacksmith /YouTube)

By adding different salts to the plasma, Hobson can change the beam's colour. For example, boric acid will make a green beam like Yoda's lightsaber, sodium chloride produces a bright yellow like Rey's, and strontium chloride will generate a bright red for those who prefer to walk on the dark side.

But unlike the Star Wars version, Hobson's isn't 100-per-cent mobile. It comes with an external power pack worn on the back, Ghostbusters style.

"Even with all our new equipment and capabilities here at Hacksmith Industries, we're still bound by the laws of thermodynamics," Hobson explains in the video.

"We don't exactly have D-size batteries capable of putting out more power than a nuclear power plant — which by the way, is what you'd need for a lightsaber to function like it does in the movies."

Hobson says the lightsaber is dangerous, and not for sale. (The Hacksmith/YouTube)

This isn't the team's first crack at a lightsaber, nor their first replica of science-fiction technology.

The whole point of the Hacksmith YouTube Channel is to replicate fictional objects using real-world technology and engineering. Previous creations include Iron Man's helmet, Captain America's shield, Batman's grappling hook and Inspector Gadget's helicopter hat.

"It's literally our bread and butter. It's what we come to work to do every day, Hobson said. "And obviously, lightsabers are one of the most famous and most popular sci-fi technologies in the world."

Hobson, who has a bachelor's degree in mechanical systems engineering, quit his previous job in 2015 to dedicate himself to Hacksmith Industries. In that time, the company has grown into a team of 14 employees, and a YouTube channel with 10.2 million subscribers.

The idea, he says, is to inspire young people to take interest in science, technology, engineering and mathematics.

"Because we've been doing it so long, we've gotten comments now, like: 'I went to engineering school because of your videos, and now I've graduated and now I'm working as an engineer.' And it's really rewarding to hear stuff like that," Hobson said.

But these are not the kind of projects you can try at home, he said — and the prototypes are not for sale.

"It's not about teaching them how to do what we're doing," Hobson said. "It's showing them what's possible through engineering. It's bringing your wildest ideas to life."

Written by Sheena Goodyear. Interview produced by Katie Geleff.

