Citizens shouldn't have to sue their own government to ensure the right to health-care services, says the doctor who runs Fredericton's abortion clinic.

"In a perfect world, you don't have to sue your government to either respect the Canada Health Act or simply provide equal access to health care," said Dr. Adrian Edgar.

But the New Brunswick government's rigid refusal to fund abortions outside of hospitals has left civil libertarians no choice but to start legal action, said Noa Mendelsohn Aviv of the Canadian Civil Liberties Association.

The organization sent a letter to the New Brunswick government Wednesday, promising legal action if the government doesn't repeal the law that only allows for funding for abortions done in hospitals.

Mendelsohn Aviv said she doesn't believe the government will repeal the law without a fight.

"Although we started it with a letter and we'd like to end it with the letter ... we are going to see it through. We have the resources. We have the support. We have the team. We have the knowledge. And we intend to pursue this all the way through until an unnecessary, unjustifiable restriction on access to abortion is removed or repealed," said Mendelsohn Aviv, the association's equality program director.

She said New Brunswick continues to ignore the constitutional rights of women, girls and trans individuals.

Kerri Froc, an associate law professor at the University of New Brunswick, who is helping the Canadian Civil Liberties Association in its action against the government, said it's "totally ridiculous" to have to resort to a lawsuit to get the government to make changes that every other province already has.

"It shouldn't have to come to this," she said.

"I just don't agree with the government spending our hard-earned tax dollars to go and try to litigate this so that people that have been denied health care are fighting against a government using their own money, essentially," said Froc.

Kerri Froc, an associate law professor at the University of New Brunswick, at a gathering last month to protest the closing of Clinic 554. (Submitted by Kerri Froc)

The province has steadfastly been against funding abortions since the 1980s, when Dr. Henry Morgentaler first announced that he would set up an abortion clinic in Fredericton.

Through a series of court battles and constitutional challenges, the province eventually began funding abortions done in hospitals.

Currently, three hospitals — two in Moncton and one in Bathurst — perform surgical abortions.

Clinic 554 in Fredericton continues to perform abortions, although "that could end any day," said Edgar, since they're not funded by Medicare.

Edgar said the building is for sale, but he's still willing to talk to government officials about the future of the facility. He says no one has ever called him back — not the premier, the health minister, nor the province's chief medical officer of health.

The building that houses Clinic 554 until Sept. 30 is up for sale. (Mike Heenan/CBC)

He said he sent at least 30 messages to the former health minister and four to the new minister and hasn't received anything in return.

Edgar has also scaled back his family medicine practice to only the "most vulnerable patients," putting thousands of people back on the waiting list for a family doctor.

"There are some services that we could reintroduce or try to maintain, especially the ones that are so unique. The government really has to respond to any of my attempts to meet with them. And they just simply don't."

That leaves three hospitals that perform surgical abortions — and now two of them are practically shut down after the Moncton health region was returned to the orange phase. People are advised not to travel into or out of those areas, which means access to abortions is even further limited, said Froc.

"New Brunswick's restrictions on abortions are insidious and create undue hardship on women, girls and trans individuals … With those three hospitals in two cities, 90 per cent of New Brunswickers do not have adequate abortion services in their local community," said Mendelsohn Aviv.

"We're continuing Dr. Morgentaler's fight, and are committed to seeing this through," she said.

While not optimistic, Edgar is hopeful that the government won't continue to fight a legal battle that governments all across Canada have conceded in recent decades.

"Well, my hope is that the government in New Brunswick will just take a moment to reflect on what there is to gain and what there is to lose by fighting a protracted court battle," said Edgar.

Froc calls it "a loser of a case."

Legal history

Mendelsohn Aviv doesn't think the province's initial approach to Morgentaler will hold much legal weight if the province decides to fight this time around.

At the time, Morgentaler applied for public interest standing in the case, but the province argued that only a woman directly affected by the restrictions could challenge their constitutionality.

In 2009, the Court of Appeal of New Brunswick rejected the province's argument and granted Morgentaler public-interest standing.

The decision was not appealed, but Morgentaler died before the challenge could proceed.

Mendelsohn Aviv says the law on public interest standing has evolved since that time and she doesn't think the New Brunswick government would get very far with it today.

She said courts understand that average citizens don't have the time or the resources to launch protracted legal battles on constitutional issues.

"And so there is more room for public interest groups to advance causes on behalf of the many people who are affected in the public," said Mendelsohn Aviv.

And that's where groups like hers come in.

When asked for an interview with Premier Blaine Higgs on Thursday, a spokesperson for the province responded by email on Friday morning, saying, "We do not comment on potential legal matters."York Region will join Toronto, Peel and Ottawa in moving into a modified version Stage 2 as it deals with a surge in new COVID-19 cases, Premier Doug Ford said Friday.

The change will take effect at 12:01 a.m. Monday and stay in place for at least 28 days, he said at his daily news conference.

That means that gyms, indoor dining rooms and movie theatres will be closed in the region, which includes Markham, Vaughan and Richmond Hill. But schools, child care centres and places of worship will remain open and must continue following the public health measures in place.

On Thursday, Ford said York Region has been "teetering for a while," and that the province is keeping a close eye on the region, calling its numbers "concerning."

But he said the decision was a difficult one to make, given the potential consequences for local businesses.

"I hate doing this," he said. "We just have to stop the spread."

WATCH | Premier Doug Ford explains his decision to move York Region into a modified Stage 2:

York Region moves to modified Stage 2 COVID-19 restrictions 1:44 On Friday, Premier Doug Ford announced that York Region will join Toronto, Peel and Ottawa in moving into a modified version Stage 2 as it deals with a surge in new COVID-19 cases. The change will take effect at 12:01 a.m. on Oct. 19 and stay in place for at least 28 days. 1:44

From Oct. 3 to Oct. 9, York Region's case rate increased by 49 per cent to 38.7 per 100,000 people, which is above the Ontario average, according to the province.

In addition, the number of COVID-19 hospitalizations in the region has doubled over the past week.

The region also saw an increase in its testing positivity rate to 2.77 per cent, which is above the "high alert" threshold of 2.5 per cent.

Meanwhile, Ontario reported another 712 cases of COVID-19 on Friday as the number of people in Ontario hospitals with confirmed cases of the illness continued its slow but steady climb.

Trends in the 'wrong direction'

Health Minister Christine Elliott said that the current trends in the area are "concerning" and that they "required us to take action."

"The trends we've seen in York Region are in the wrong direction," Elliott said. "Numbers have jumped and we need to do everything we can to avoid a very severe second wave."

York Region's chairman and CEO, Wayne Emmerson, and its Medical Officer of Health Dr. Karim Kurji issued a joint statement urging residents to abide by the new rules.

"While this is not the news any of us wanted to hear, it is a grim reminder the virus is still a threat to the 1.2 million people who call York Region home," the pair said in the statement.

"It also serves as a signal we all must continue taking steps to keep each other, our families and our communities safe.

WATCH | Health Minister Christine Elliott on the concerning COVID-19 trends in York Region:

'Concerning trends' in York Region, says Ontario health minister 3:46 York Region moving to modified Stage 2 of COVID-19 restrictions was a decision made after seeing concerning trends and looking at multiple indicators, including community transmission, says Ontario Health Minister Christine Elliott. 3:46

Both the premier and health minister also issued a plea to those living in Halton Region, which has also seen recent increases in new daily cases, to keep following public health guidelines to prevent similar action there.

The daily number of infections remained above the 700 mark all this week, with 807 cases on Monday, 746 on Tuesday, and 721 on Wednesday.

The largest number in today's update — 213 cases — was reported in Toronto, followed by Peel with 135 cases, Ottawa with 108 cases and York Region with 62.

After steadily increasing for more than a week, the seven-day average of new daily cases dropped for a second straight day, and it now sits at about 746.

Ontario confirmed nine new deaths linked to COVID-19 on Friday, taking the province's death toll to 3,031.

The province's labs processed 38,500 tests.

There are 713 more resolved cases taking the provincial total to 54,004 recovered patients.

Meanwhile, there are 261 people hospitalized as a result of COVID-19. Of this number 67 people are in intensive care units across the province, 36 of them on a ventilator.

Meanwhile, as of today, residents of long-term care homes in three regions where cases have been surging are not allowed to go out for social or personal reasons.

The new restrictions will apply to long-term care homes in Toronto, Peel Region and Ottawa, and will remain in place until further notice.

Federal contact tracers ready to help

On Friday, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said federal contact tracers are ready to help chase down people who might have been exposed to COVID-19.

He says they can make up to 14,000 calls a day, at the request of the provinces and territories.

Quickly following up with people who have been close to someone who tests positive for the illness is seen as essential to containing its spread.

Some jurisdictions, including Toronto, have limited the number of people they will try to reach as new cases have cropped up faster than contact tracers can work.

Province supports production of PPEs

On Friday the province announced it continues to work with businesses and the manufacturing sector to expand production of domestic PPE to ensure preparedness, both now and for the future.

To support the fight against COVID-19, Greenfield Global is investing a total of $75 million at their facility in Johnstown Ontario to produce the medical-grade alcohol critical to making hand sanitizers used by Ontario individuals, families, and front-line workers.

The Ontario government is investing $2.5 million through the Ontario Together Fund in support of this project.

The announcement was made today by MPP Steve Clark and Minister of Municipal Affairs and Housing on behalf of Vic Fedeli, Minister of Economic Development, Job Creation and Trade.

"By working together with these innovative businesses, we are ensuring we are well-prepared for the future as we continue our fight against COVID-19," Fedeli said.