LISTEN TO ARTICLE 4:33 SHARE THIS ARTICLE Share Tweet Post Email

Photographer: Della Rollins/Bloomberg Photographer: Della Rollins/Bloomberg

Waterloo Brewing Ltd. has spent eight years and C$85million ($64 million) expanding its facilities, all so it can make booze for someone else.

The Ontario-based company, which got its start making craft lagers 40 years ago, wants to be the go-to producer for global brands selling everything from hard seltzers to canned cocktails in Canada. In the next two years it plans to more than double the volume of beverages it’s producing for other brands -- known in the industry as co-packing -- to 650,000 hectoliters from around 300,000 hectoliters this year.

Its craft brew business is still growing -- Waterloo’s namesake brands posted volume growth of 25% in its most recent quarter -- but even those gains can’t keep pace with the demand the company is seeing from global conglomerates, like Pernod Ricard SA and Carlsberg AS. Seeking to expand the reach of the beverage brands they’ve snapped up in recent years, these ever-growing giants are also looking for ways to trim costs.

At the other end of the scale, Waterloo is getting an additional boost from new hard seltzer companies and other beverage startups, keen to focus on marketing and leave production to someone else.

“Our owned brand volumes continue to grow, but the exponential growth is in our co-pack business,” Chief Executive Officer George Croft said in an interview.

So far, the strategy is winning approval from investors. Waterloo rose 1.6% to C$4.95 at 11:44 a.m. in Toronto, on track for a record high close. The shares have surged more than 40% this year, compared with a 3.4% drop for the S&P/Toronto Composite Index.



It’s a major transformation for a company that barely had a toehold in the co-packing business when Croft came aboard 12 years ago. (His previous employer, Canada’s storied Labatt Brewing, is now owned by much larger Belgian beverage giant Anheuser-Busch InBev SA.)

Founded in 1984, Waterloo Brewing claims to be the first craft brewery in Ontario. Originally called Brick Brewing, after founder Jim Brickman, it was renamed last year in homage to the Ontario region where it’s based.

Waterloo produces a stable of traditional craft-beer styles, including a golden lager, an India pale ale, as well as dark and amber lagers that for close to forty years have been the choice of customers who wanted bolder flavors than those provided by mass-produced brews.

George Croft Source: Waterloo Brewing Ltd.

Since Croft came aboard, it has expanded beyond beer with the purchase of the Canadian rights to Seagram coolers, as well as the LandShark and Margaritaville brands. It also has co-packing deals to manufacture Absolut Vodka’s canned cocktails, Somersby ciders and Mott’s Clamato beverages, along with nine other undisclosed brands, in Canada.

While it’s difficult to find hard figures, co-packing has become increasingly common for large beverage companies that want to quickly capitalize on hot new drinks trends and keep their costs low, said Kenneth Shea, an analyst at Bloomberg Intelligence.

“Co-packing is a vibrant activity involving most of the large beverage companies -- as packer or customer-- exacerbated by the rush into the fast-growing hard seltzer business,” Shea said.

Waterloo’s further expansion plans for the next two years will almost double Waterloo’s annual production to 1.2 million hectoliters in fiscal 2023. By then, co-packing will represent about 54% of the company’s volume, from 46% currently.

Pallets of beverages at Waterloo’s warehouse. Photographer: Della Rollins/Bloomberg

Current contracts are locked in so barring a sharp decline in alcohol consumption in Canada, or specifically beer, which still accounts for about 55% of total volume, Croft sees few risks ahead. The brewer-for-hire model mitigates the risk of consumer tastes changing and allows it to benefit from new trends while leaving the marketing to their clients.

“People that are getting into the seltzer business are saying, ‘Geez, I know how to build brands, I understand the route to market, but why would I build a facility, why would I take on that complexity?’” Croft said.

There’s also scope to diversify through acquisitions, once the expansion is complete and capital spending drops back to C$4 million to C$5 million a year, Croft said. He expects to be on the hunt in the next 12 to 24 months; the ideal candidate would be a branded business with excess manufacturing capacity and the ability to expand production from around 250,000 hectoliters to as much as 500,000 hectoliters, Croft said.

He’d also like to add geographic diversity by targeting companies in the western provinces of Alberta and British Columbia.

“We don’t want to have all our eggs in one basket,” Croft said. “So if we do get a red light in one piece of our business, it’s not a paralyzing issue.”

— With assistance by Divya BaljiThe Canadian government is sticking to its ambitious plans for bringing newcomers into the country, even as its borders remain essentially closed.

Immigration Minister Marco Mendicino is leaning against scaling back the government’s immigration targets for the coming years, according to two people familiar with the matter. That includes bringing in 351,000 new permanent residents in 2021 -- the most in a century. The government will update its three-year projections within the next month.

Since coming to power in 2015, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s Liberal government has sought to accelerate immigration, a policy that before COVID-19 struck had helped drive the fastest pace of population growth in three decades. Sticking to that policy could be a challenge.

Fewer Newcomers

Current travel restrictions and borders closures have sapped the flow of people into Canada. A high unemployment rate that looks likely to persist, and the fact Trudeau’s minority government must rely on support from opposition political parties to pass legislation, pose additional challenges.

In March, Mendicino unveiled a plan to increase immigration over the next three years -- targeting 341,000 permanent residents in 2020, 351,000 in 2021, and 361,000 in 2022.

So far, the 2020 numbers aren’t even close.

COVID Fears

Between January and August, Canada admitted 128,430 permanent residents. If the flow returns to 2019 levels, that number will rise to 240,000, or about 70 per cent of the target, according to Andrew Agopsowicz, an economist at Royal Bank of Canada. But even that may be optimistic.

It “may be possible if people have been delaying their move to Canada,” Agopsowicz said by email. “Of course, increased fears of a Covid resurgence may impact these plans.”

A similar trend has emerged in study permits as well, as international students have largely been unable to travel to Canada.

The decline in immigration is having significant knock-on effects in the housing market. For example, the vacancy rate for rental apartments in the Toronto area surpassed two per cent for the first time in 10 years, according to third-quarter data from research firm Urbanation Inc. Condominium rental listings doubled in the period and average monthly rents dropped more than nine per cent, the firm reported.

Mendicino’s office has consulted with various business, labor and settlement organizations to gauge the current demand for immigration. The minister is expected to announce the new targets by Nov. 1, which is the deadline for the department to present its plans before Parliament.