B.C. health officials announced 155 new cases of COVID-19 on Friday, bringing the total number of cases since the pandemic began to 11,189 provincewide.

There are currently 1,513 active cases of the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, as well as 3,713 people who are under active public health monitoring as a result of exposure to known cases, according to a news release Friday from the Ministry of Health.

Of those active cases, 72 people are in hospital with 26 in intensive care.

There has been one new death from the coronavirus in the past 24 hours, bringing the total provincial death toll to 251.

Health officials say 9,387 people in B.C. have recovered from the virus.

On Thursday, Henry's update included the first confirmed case of multi-system inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C), a rare condition found in children, that has been linked to COVID-19 through laboratory tests.

MIS-C has clinical similarities to Kawasaki Disease, with symptoms including fever, abdominal pain, rashes, conjunctivitis and inflammation around the mouth, hands and feet.

Henry said the case is a good reminder that while COVID-19 is generally less severe in children, no age group is immune from suffering serious illness caused by the novel coronavirus.

New outbreak in Merritt

Health officials say there has been one new community outbreak at the main Tim Hortons restaurant in Merritt leading the establishment to close voluntarily.



The Interior Health authority says the business had precautions in place to prevent transmission to the public and its investigation has determined there was no exposure to the general public.



It says all confirmed cases are isolating while contact tracing is underway and the authority will increase testing capacity in Merritt to address any possible additional demands, nor is there any evidence that COVID-19 is spread through food made by infected people.

There also continues to be exposure events around the province which are posted on the websites of the B.C. Centre for Disease Control and health authorities.

There are no new outbreaks in the health-care system. The outbreak at Kin Village has been declared over. leaving 15 active outbreaks in long-term care and assisted living and two in acute care units of hospitals.

Voting safely

Henry reminds British Columbians that the provincial election is just over a week away and that advanced voting is available throughout the province. She says Elections BC has COVID-19 safety plans in place for all locations.

"If you are planning on voting in person, remember to give others the space to stay safe when going to vote, wash your hands before and after voting, and consider using a mask if distancing is a challenge," Henry stated in the written statement.

She says those who are self-isolating or feeling unwell can still vote without going to a voting place and should contact Elections BC at 1 800 661-8683 for more information or assistance.

Flu shots please

Henry reiterated this week the importance of getting vaccinated for the flu. She said sooner is better than later, but it's best to get a flu shot by late October or early November.

Though demand has been unusually high this year and some pharmacies are already reporting running out of the vaccine, Henry said supplies will be replenished throughout the season.Canadian Heritage Minister Steven Guilbeault has called the practice of linking to news articles on social media sites such as Facebook “immoral” and indicated that he plans to establish a new mandated licensing requirement that would be overseen by the Copyright Board of Canada and backed by the threat of government penalties for failure to comply. Guilbeault’s plan, which is part of his “get money from web giants” legislative priority, could result in Facebook blocking all sharing of news articles in Canada, which would harm Canadian media organizations, the broader public, and contribute to increased profile for questionable or misleading sources of news.

While Guilbeault has suggested that these sources post entire articles, this is inaccurate. The reality is that these are merely links to the articles (typically with a headline and sentence or two) that send the users back to the originating site. As Andrew Coyne noted in his excellent column on this issue, not only do media organizations benefit from the free referrals, but they actively encourage their users to post links, including widgets to do so at the bottom of every article. In fact, a review of how Canadian media organizations interact with Facebook demonstrates that it goes well beyond just encouraging linking or sharing on their sites.

I recently used the CrowdTangle Chrome extension offered by Facebook to gain a better understanding of how the social media engagement works for Canadian news articles. This post – the first of several on point – looks at a single article. I started with the Toronto Star’s coverage of last month’s Speech from the Throne, particularly an article on the promise to make tech giants pay. The article was notable for opening with the following sentence:

The federal throne speech offered a good news nugget for Canada’s media industry, after a long and costly struggle against content-poaching tech giants.

So what kind of tech giant “content-poaching” took place for this article?

It turns out that virtually all the public engagement with the article – comments, likes or sharing of the article – came from a Facebook post that the Toronto Star posted itself. Of 83 public interactions (the larger number of 115 interactions including private likes or comments that are not publicly available), 81 came from the Toronto Star post. In fact, there were only two other posts of the Star article: one from News Media Canada (the lead lobby group on this issue) that generated two interactions and one from a user named Mohawk Judy, whose post did not generate any further interactions. The identical article also appeared in the Peterborough Examiner, which is owned by the Torstar. The CrowdTangle data indicates that the Peterborough Examiner itself posted a link to the article twice on Facebook, generating a total of five interactions. There were no other posts.

In short, there was no content-poaching here. Rather, the Toronto Star and the Peterborough Examiner posted multiple links themselves on Facebook and virtually all the resulting public engagement came from their posts. There were practically no other postings nor any posting of the article in full. From a legal perspective, the content actually is licensed since the Toronto Star grants Facebook a licence to host and distribute the content as part of its terms of service:

Specifically, when you share, post, or upload content that is covered by intellectual property rights on or in connection with our Products, you grant us a non-exclusive, transferable, sub-licensable, royalty-free, and worldwide license to host, use, distribute, modify, run, copy, publicly perform or display, translate, and create derivative works of your content (consistent with your privacy and application settings). This means, for example, that if you share a photo on Facebook, you give us permission to store, copy, and share it with others (again, consistent with your settings) such as service providers that support our service or other Facebook Products you use.This license will end when your content is deleted from our systems.

The media organizations actively encourage users to link to their articles on Facebook for the obvious reason that it increases traffic to their site and thereby generates ad revenue. Facebook does not charge a referral fee, a posting fee or any other fee in connection with the display of links to the newspaper article. Yet according to Guilbeault, these links (which are often licensed through the terms of service) are somehow immoral and merit a mandated licensing requirement. If enacted, the government would be establishing a regime that would grant news organizations guaranteed payments for their own posts, which helps explain why Facebook has indicated that they are likely to simply stop the linking altogether.