Article content

Nicola Moore recently released her first song, “The Arrow.” A singer-songwriter, peer advocate at the Hamilton Community Food Centre, and single mother of three children under nine, she’s made the most of any pandemic-induced “lulls” in her life by writing music.

“I could sit here and get Ontario Works payments or I could do something about it and change my life, which is what I’m trying to do right now,” says Moore. “Advocacy and singing are my way out.“

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or One in seven Canadians is experiencing food insecurity during COVID-19, and its toll is heavier than hunger: report Back to video

A first-time gardener on a community plot, Moore is ecstatic when describing her harvest: cucumbers, green beans, lettuce, squash, tomatoes, a variety of herbs and an abundance of kale. She’s also in the midst of a project at work, illustrating how to spin a can of chickpeas a multitude of ways so others — like herself — can transform the canned items they get on monthly trips to the food bank.

“Because I am them,” says Moore. “They are me.”

Photo by Hamilton Community Food Centre

Prior to the pandemic, according to a report released by the non-profit Community Food Centres Canada (CFCC), an estimated 4.5 million Canadians experienced food insecurity. During COVID-19, that number has increased by 39 per cent; disproportionately affecting Black, Indigenous and northern communities. As a result of the strains of the pandemic, one in seven people — including Moore — is food insecure; unable to afford enough food, or worried about running out without the means to buy more.As overall financial market conditions continue to improve in Canada, usage in several of the Bank of Canada’s programs that support the functioning of key financial markets has declined significantly. As such, the Bank is announcing changes to the Bankers’ Acceptance Purchase Facility (BAPF), the Canada Mortgage Bond Purchase Program (CMBP) , and the extended Term Repo operations.

The Bank will discontinue the BAPF with the last operation scheduled for October 26, 2020. Similarly, the Bank will discontinue the CMBP with the last operations scheduled for the week of October 26, 2020.

Effective on October 21, 2020 the Bank will reduce the frequency of its Term Repo operations from weekly to bi-weekly. As such, the subsequent Term Repo operation will be conducted on November 3, 2020. The exact date and terms will be announced prior to each operation. In addition, effective immediately, the eligible securities for regular Term Repo operations will include only Canadian dollar-denominated marketable securities that are directly-issued or explicitly guaranteed by the Government of Canada or by a Canadian provincial government and that are eligible for the Standing Liquidity Facility. Own-name covered bonds, own-name Term ABS and own-name ABCP will no longer be eligible (Terms & Conditions).

The Bank will continue to monitor market conditions and, if warranted, may further revise its programs, including making changes to the size and maturity tranches of the term repo operations.

The Bank remains committed to providing liquidity as required to support the functioning of the Canadian financial system. Any discontinued facilities can be restarted if necessary.



Director

Financial Markets Department

Bank of Canada

613-782-7245



Director

Financial Markets Department

Bank of Canada

613-782-7723



Bank of Canada

613-782-8782