Article content continued

Bibby’s experience is representative of a wider trend in Toronto, where it appears that these smaller units are weighing down the entire market.

According to research firm Urbanation Inc., sales of condos sized at 500 sq. ft. and under were down 20 per cent year over year in September, while sales for units of other size ranges were either flat or still positive. These micro units are also the only condos on the market to have experienced a price decline thus far. And, thanks to a tumbling sales-to-new-listings ratio, they’re the only form of housing that is firmly in buyer’s-market territory.

“It’s become clear that COVID-19 has caused two shifts in demand: A desire for more space and more value-oriented homes outside the core, both of which negatively impact the market for small condos,” said Shaun Hildebrand, president of Urbanation.

Pre-COVID-19, these condos were the hottest on the market. Investors flocked to them because they were the only form of housing under $500,000 available in Toronto and the high rents they could charge on these units meant that making profit was close to a sure thing. Most of them were snatched up on the pre-construction market and as investors became more emboldened by their returns, they bought more units, Hildebrand said.

Now they’re the ones flooding the market with listings. In September, new listings for micro units were up 165 per cent year over year. So many of these condos have hit the market, that active listings now represent 5.2 months of supply. Hildebrand said it is considered a buyer’s market when supply reaches four months.Article content

Nicola Moore recently released her first song, “The Arrow.” A singer-songwriter, peer advocate at the Hamilton Community Food Centre, and single mother of three children under nine, she’s made the most of any pandemic-induced “lulls” in her life by writing music.

“I could sit here and get Ontario Works payments or I could do something about it and change my life, which is what I’m trying to do right now,” says Moore. “Advocacy and singing are my way out.“

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or One in seven Canadians is experiencing food insecurity during COVID-19, and its toll is heavier than hunger: report Back to video

A first-time gardener on a community plot, Moore is ecstatic when describing her harvest: cucumbers, green beans, lettuce, squash, tomatoes, a variety of herbs and an abundance of kale. She’s also in the midst of a project at work, illustrating how to spin a can of chickpeas a multitude of ways so others — like herself — can transform the canned items they get on monthly trips to the food bank.

“Because I am them,” says Moore. “They are me.”

Photo by Hamilton Community Food Centre

Prior to the pandemic, according to a report released by the non-profit Community Food Centres Canada (CFCC), an estimated 4.5 million Canadians experienced food insecurity. During COVID-19, that number has increased by 39 per cent; disproportionately affecting Black, Indigenous and northern communities. As a result of the strains of the pandemic, one in seven people — including Moore — is food insecure; unable to afford enough food, or worried about running out without the means to buy more.