China has warned Canada not to grant political asylum to Hong Kong pro-democracy protesters, labeling them violent criminals and saying the action would constitute interference in China’s internal affairs.

Chinese Ambassador to Canada Cong Peiwu said Thursday that “if the Canadian side really cares about the stability and the prosperity in Hong Kong, and really cares about the good health and safety of those 300,000 Canadian passport-holders in Hong Kong, and the large number of Canadian companies operating in Hong Kong SAR [Special Administrative Region], you should support those efforts to fight violent crimes.”

Canadian Foreign Minister Francois-Philippe Champagne called Cong's statement "totally unacceptable and disturbing."

"I have instructed Global Affairs to call the ambassador in to make clear in no uncertain terms that Canada will always stand up for human rights and the rights of Canadians around the world," Champagne said in a statement published by Canadian news organizations.

Earlier this week, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau strongly criticized Beijing for "coercive diplomacy" and for the crackdowns in Hong Kong and on Uighur Muslims in China’s Xinjiang region.

At his press briefing Thursday, Cong countered Trudeau's comments, saying there was no coercive diplomacy on the Chinese side, adding that “the Hong Kong issue and the Xinjiang-related issue are not about the issue of human rights. They are purely about internal affairs of China, which brooks no interference from the outside."

Protests of Hong Kong’s pro-Beijing government and the Chinese government continued in the city for months last year and resulted in a new national security law for Hong Kong that took effect June 30.

The law punishes secessionist movements, subversive or terrorist acts, and what it interprets as collusion with foreign forces intervening in the city's affairs.

Western powers, including the United States, Britain and Canada have strongly condemned the law and have accused China of infringing on Hong Kong’s freedoms.Article content continued

Bibby’s experience is representative of a wider trend in Toronto, where it appears that these smaller units are weighing down the entire market.

According to research firm Urbanation Inc., sales of condos sized at 500 sq. ft. and under were down 20 per cent year over year in September, while sales for units of other size ranges were either flat or still positive. These micro units are also the only condos on the market to have experienced a price decline thus far. And, thanks to a tumbling sales-to-new-listings ratio, they’re the only form of housing that is firmly in buyer’s-market territory.

“It’s become clear that COVID-19 has caused two shifts in demand: A desire for more space and more value-oriented homes outside the core, both of which negatively impact the market for small condos,” said Shaun Hildebrand, president of Urbanation.

Pre-COVID-19, these condos were the hottest on the market. Investors flocked to them because they were the only form of housing under $500,000 available in Toronto and the high rents they could charge on these units meant that making profit was close to a sure thing. Most of them were snatched up on the pre-construction market and as investors became more emboldened by their returns, they bought more units, Hildebrand said.

Now they’re the ones flooding the market with listings. In September, new listings for micro units were up 165 per cent year over year. So many of these condos have hit the market, that active listings now represent 5.2 months of supply. Hildebrand said it is considered a buyer’s market when supply reaches four months.